











 
 Entry Navigation 






Entry Contents


Bibliography


Academic Tools


Friends PDF Preview 


Author and Citation Info 
 


Back to Top 


























Aesthetic Testimony
First published Wed Mar 13, 2024





Testimony is an important source of knowledge which is used
ubiquitously in our daily lives (Coady 1992; Lackey 2008; Lackey &
Sosa 2006; Matilal & Chakrabarti 1994; Faulkner 2011; Moran 2018;
Wright 2019). Given this, it is particularly interesting
that—despite the widespread general reliance on
testimony—there are influential strands of thought which hold
that we ought to avoid such reliance in certain atypical areas. The
aesthetic domain has long been held to be one of these atypical areas
(for discussion of other putative exception cases see, e.g., Hills
2009; Sliwa 2012; Sweeney 2007; Jay 2016; and Ranalli 2020). Indeed,
ever since Kant’s 
Critique of the Power of Judgment

(1790), it has been argued that when we engage with matters of an
aesthetic character, first-hand experience of the aesthetic qualities
in question is, in some sense, required (Kant 1790; Mothersill 1961;
Tormey 1973). The central idea is that when determining, for example,
whether the painting is harmonious, the dance graceful, or the sunset
beautiful, we must experience the aesthetic character of the object of
appreciation for ourselves. It simply will not do—though there
has been considerably less consensus about 
why
 it won’t
do—for us to rely on testimony.








1. Testimony in Aesthetics




1.1 Scope and Terminology


1.2 A Brief History of the Debate






2. Broader Principles




2.1 The Acquaintance Principle


2.2 Further Principles






3. Different Concerns




3.1 Unavailability Pessimism




3.1.1 Anti-Realist Approaches


3.1.2 Realist Approaches


3.1.3 “Moderately Optimistic” Approaches.






3.2 Unusability Pessimism




3.2.1 Norms of Use


3.2.2 Autonomy


3.2.3 Authenticity and Aesthetic Personality


3.2.4 Aesthetic Development: A Moderate Approach










4. Optimistic Responses




4.1 Optimistic Responses to Unavailability Pessimism




4.1.1 Anti-Realist Approaches: An Optimistic Response


4.1.2 Realist Approaches: An Optimistic Response


4.1.3 “Moderately Optimistic Approaches”: A (More) Optimistic Response






4.2 Optimistic Responses to Unusability Pessimism




4.2.1 Norms of Use: An Optimistic Response


4.2.2 Autonomy: An Optimistic Response


4.2.3 Authenticity and Aesthetic Personality: An Optimistic Response


4.2.4 Aesthetic Development: A (More) Optimistic Response










5. Arguments for Pessimism




5.1 Reluctance to form aesthetic judgements


5.2 Appeals to Cases


5.3 Arguments from Assertion






6. Arguments for Optimism




6.1 The Range of Aesthetic Judgements


6.2 Aesthetic Practice


7. The Value of Testimony






Bibliography


Academic Tools


Other Internet Resources


Related Entries










1. Testimony in Aesthetics


1.1 Scope and Terminology



The precise nature of testimony is itself a matter of philosophical
controversy and various different accounts have been offered.
Elizabeth Fricker (2012: 254) takes testimony to be a very broad
matter concerning “tellings generally”, similarly Sosa
(1991: 219) describes testimony as a “statement [or expression]
of someone”s thoughts or beliefs, which they might direct to the
world at large, and to no one in particular’. Other plausible
accounts build in the condition that the expression must be
communicated with the intention to impart information that has the
potential to tell us something new (Lackey 2008: Ch1) and still others
build in certain positive epistemic aspects, such as that the
testifier has some degree of competence regarding the issue at hand
(Coady 1992: 42). In what follows, we will have little to say about
these general debates but will focus, as the debate in aesthetics has
tended to, on testimony in a very broad sense—aiming to
accommodate the basic idea that when one testifies, one makes an
assertion to the truth of some proposition.



In following the debate in aesthetics, it is also worth noting that we
will—as is now standard—be confining ourselves to cases of
“pure testimony”, that is cases where a testifier invites
their audience to believe





that 
p
 on the basis that her informant 
T
 claims that

p
, and independently of any evidence that 
T
 offers
for that claim. (Hopkins 2011: 138)





Someone offering pure testimony on the beauty of Matisse’s
Appolon would simply state “Matisse”s Appolon is
beautiful’ without adding further reasons or descriptions to
defend their judgement.



With this notion of testimony in mind, the central controversy we will
focus on concerns the suggestion that we should not defer to testimony
in aesthetics. Deferential responses to pure testimony require
accepting the invitation to form a judgement that 
p
 on the
basis of the testifier’s testimony, even though the testifier
has not added any supporting reasons for this judgement—and
require one to do so without attempting to further verify the matter
for oneself. Non-deferential responses are typically understood to be
ones in which we, e.g., suspend judgement (Hopkins 2001:
167–169) on the matter and actively respond to the matter in
question, using testimony as a prompt to investigate and try to form
the judgements for ourselves (a less charitable interlocutor might
simply disregard the testimony entirely but this isn’t required
for being non-deferential in the relevant sense). One might still
qualify as deferring if, when forming the judgement that p, one
consults wider information about the testifier’s general
competence and sincerity—one might, for example, take into
consideration the testifier’s general track-record in the
aesthetic domain, or consult any available information about the
testifier’s tendency to lie for social gain—just so long
as one does not attempt to specifically verify for oneself whether or
not 
p
 is true. Those who take a negative view of deference to
testimony in aesthetics will typically also—as we will see in
 
§1.2
 below—be
 sceptical of the role of other methods (such as inductive inference)
other than first-person judgement in establishing aesthetic claims.
However, we don’t take this to be definitive of the position
itself.



Something like the generally negative view of deference to testimony
just described has come to be known as “pessimism concerning
aesthetic testimony” (the terminology was first employed by
Hopkins (2007) to name the parallel position concerning moral
testimony). The pessimist holds that we cannot legitimately form
aesthetic judgements on the basis of testimony. By contrast, the
pessimist’s opponent, the optimist concerning aesthetic
testimony, maintains that—provided certain conditions are
met—it can be perfectly legitimate to do so. These are (as we
will see in
 
§3
)
 overly simplified versions of what are often very nuanced views on
both sides but they will be helpful for the time being.


1.2 A Brief History of the Debate



The historical genesis of discussion of issues surrounding aesthetic
testimony appears to be Kant’s third critique, where he notes
that:





If a man […] does not find a building, a prospect, or a poem
beautiful, a hundred voices all highly praising it will not force his
innermost agreement… he clearly sees that the agreement of
others gives no valid proof of the judgement about beauty […]
that a thing has pleased others could never serve as the basis for an
aesthetical judgement. (1790: Part I, Div. 1, §33 [1914:
157])





There have, of course, been earlier discussions of the legitimacy of
testimony (for example in Augustine [
Revisions
 I.3];
Locke 1689 [
An Essay Concerning Human Understanding
 IV.16];
Reid 1764 [An Inquiry into the Human Mind on the Principles of Common
Sense VI.24]) as well as of the means by which we form aesthetic
judgements (Hume 1757; Hutcheson 1725/26) but Kant appears to have
been the first to explicitly rule out testimony as grounds for
specifically aesthetic judgement. (Or at least, if there are any
relevant historical precursors to this, they have yet to be
highlighted within the current literature on the topic.)



As with much of Kant’s work, though, his claim here has been
subject to a range of radically different interpretations and has
inspired a range of different forms of pessimism (Gorodeisky 2010;
Hopkins 2001; Scruton 1974). A key part of the issue here is that
Kant’s discussion of testimony is incredibly brief (including
scarcely more than the material quoted above). He almost immediately
moves on to highlight, what he takes to be, the even greater obstacles
to founding our aesthetic judgements on the basis of “an 
a
priori
 proof determine[d] according to definite rules”
(1790, Part I, Div. 1, §33 [1914: 157]). And, in particular, he
moves to denying the legitimacy of a specific kind of proof, that
which is based on so-called “principles of taste”. For
there to be a principle of taste would require





a principle under the condition of which we could subsume the concept
of an object and thus infer by means of a syllogism that the object is
beautiful. (Kant 1790, Part I, Div. 1, §34 [1914: 159])





Principles of this kind are certainly at least suggested by some of
Kant’s precursors and contemporaries but much could be said
exegetically about whether any of these writers are really committed
to fully fledged principles of taste. Hutcheson (1725/26), for
example, famously thought of beautiful objects as those displaying an
appropriate ratio of uniformity to variety. However, it’s
unclear whether (even if we accept this particular view of beauty)
someone who lacked aesthetic judgement could independently identify
the appropriate kind of unity in variety and so infer beauty from
this. This debate surrounding principles of taste, or the lack of
same, subsequently went on to become a mainstay of twentieth century
analytic aesthetics (see, e.g., Beardsley 1962 and Mothersill 1961),
leaving specific discussion of aesthetic testimony somewhat neglected.
Similarly, there were significant debates concerning the kinds of
broader principles we’ll discuss in
 
Section 2
.
 Principles which rule out basing one’s aesthetic judgements on
testimony but also, 
inter alia
, doing so on the basis of
argument.



A prominent exception to the neglect of aesthetic testimony was
Tormey’s (1973) discussion of critical judgement (which he takes
[1973: 35] to be synonymous with “aesthetic judgement”)
which explicitly, albeit briefly, notes (1973: 38) that cases of
reliance on testimony should be excluded from the realm of legitimate
critical judgement. This thought was later echoed, as we will explore
further below, by Richard Wollheim (1980: 233) in his famous
Acquaintance Principle, the second part of which maintains that
aesthetic judgements are not, “except within very narrow limits,
transmissible from one person to another”. As with the other
aspects of this principle, Wollheim clearly took himself (1980) to be
pointing to an established consensus within aesthetics rather than as
proposing any kind of innovation. Something which might suggest that,
even if it wasn’t often mentioned in print, pessimism was seen
as something of common sense position at the time. Indeed, Zangwill
(1990)—in one of the first extended discussions of the status of
aesthetic testimony—goes so far as to list it as a
“dogma” of Kantian aesthetics before going on to offer an
extended argument against the pessimist.



While it was rare to see aesthetic testimony given explicit focus in
the twentieth century (Scruton 1974 being another notable exception),
this has been far from the case in the twenty-first. Following the
publication of three highly influential papers in relatively quick
succession—Hopkins (2000), Budd (2003), and Meskin
(2004)—aesthetic testimony has quickly grown into a prominent
area for debate. Something which parallels an increasing focus on
testimony within philosophy more generally (Coady 1992; Lackey 2008;
Lackey & Sosa 2006; Matilal & Chakrabarti 1994) as well as
with other putatively exceptional areas such as ethics (Hills 2009)
and religion (Jay 2016).


2. Broader Principles



It is common for those on all sides of the aesthetic testimony debate
to discuss the claims they are making (or denying) in relation to
certain putative broader principles of aesthetic judgement. In
particular, the pessimist will often aim to use such principles as
(partial) explanations for the truth of pessimism. In this section we
consider the relationship between some of these key principles and the
debate concerning aesthetic testimony.


2.1 The Acquaintance Principle



By far the most commonly appealed to principle here is Richard
Wollheim’s (1980: 233) acquaintance principle (
AP
),
according to which





judgements of aesthetic value, unlike judgements of moral knowledge,
must be based on first-hand experience of their objects and are not,
except within very narrow limits, transmissible from one person to
another.





A principle which (at least modulo the tantalising mention of
“very narrow limits”) appears to doubly rule out appeal to
aesthetic testimony, since testimony cannot provide us with first hand
acquaintance and clearly requires some kind of interpersonal
transmission.



Appeals to 
AP
 as an explanation for pessimism are, however,
fraught for two reasons. First, Wollheim’s principle, and his
subsequent discussion of it, are sometimes rather difficult to
interpret. Second, there are those who hold that 
AP
 itself is
false. These two issues are, of course, related and it is common for
both advocates and detractors of 
AP
 to argue that various
interpretations of the principle clearly render it either trivial or
implausible (Hopkins 2006; Budd 2003; Ransom 2019; Lord 2018). For
example, it seems clear that a requirement that we must always engage
with the work itself in order to make any aesthetic judgement of it is
implausibly demanding and that a suitably accurate reproduction or
sufficiently detailed photograph would allow for 
some

aesthetic insight in many cases. Where these theorists differ is
whether there are any versions of the principle which aren’t
benighted in this way. And there have been further concerns about

AP
’s ability to handle certain kinds of art works such
as conceptual art (for a discussion of these and some responses see
Hanson (2015)). Some, such as Livingston (2003) take these concerns to
undermine the prospects for any version of 
AP
 which is both
true and non-trivial but others are more hopeful. Lord (2018), for
example, has suggested that we should think about acquaintance not
with a particular artwork but, rather, with some particular highly
determinate aesthetic property which the object instantiates.
Acquaintance with this property doesn’t, strictly, require
acquaintance with the work itself but, rather, allows for acquaintance
with reproductions or photographs. However, a principle of this kind
would still rule out forming our aesthetic judgements on the basis of
induction or testimony. Regardless of how we interpret the scope of
the principle, though, there remains the question of how the
“must” should be interpreted here. On some accounts, the
demand is interpreted as an epistemic one, with acquaintance being a
prerequisite for aesthetic knowledge (Pettit 1983; Budd 2003),
but—as we will see in
 
§3.2
—even
 amongst pessimists there has been an increasing move towards
interpreting the demand as relating to some manner of non-epistemic
norm (Hopkins 2006).



More recently, though, debate has arisen as to whether 
AP

should even be interpreted as supporting a (non-trivial) version of
pessimism. Lopes (2014: 170), has claimed that “the controversy
over the acquaintance principle ensues from an incorrect
interpretation of it”. Many philosophers interpret
“aesthetic judgement” as referring to some belief-like
state—which might fail to meet some norm, epistemic or
otherwise. According to Lopes “aesthetic judgement” should
rather be interpreted as a certain kind of experiential / appreciative
state which, by its very nature, cannot be entered into on the basis
of, say, testimony. (Shelley 2023 offers a rather different, but
equally revisionary, interpretation of 
AP
.) Such exegetical
moves certainly have precedent, consider the case of Frank Sibley. A
number of discussions of aesthetic testimony (such as Gorodeisky
[2010: 58–9], Laetz [2008: 356], and Meskin [2006: 111]) have
taken Sibley to be endorsing some form of pessimism in his famous
(1965: 137) claim that





To suppose indeed that one can make aesthetic judgments without
aesthetic perception … is to misunderstand aesthetic judgment.
(alongside similar remarks in, e.g., Sibley 1959: 424–6 and
1974: 16)





This interpretation is, however, controversial and it has been
suggested (by, e.g., Livingston [2003: 268] and Lopes himself
[2014: 174]) that Sibley is merely making a certain kind of
stipulation and isn’t intending to endorse any kind of
substantive pessimistic thesis. However, it seems difficult to regard
Lopes’ proposals for a version of 
AP
—regardless
of what other merits they might have—as providing an accurate
exegesis of Wollheim’s views. (Something similar also applies to
Shelley’s (2023: 405) interpretation, but he clarifies that he
isn’t particularly concerned with whether his interpretation of

AP
 matches Wollheim’s own understanding and he does not
suggest that others are making exegetical errors.) As Wallbank and
Robson (2022: 42–4) point out, a number of Wollheim’s own
remarks (1980: 231–2) make it clear that he is open to
considering a number of different interpretations of 
AP
, at
least one of which is clearly epistemic in nature.


2.2 Further Principles



In addition to the Acquaintance Principle, there are two further
(related) kinds of principles that those within the debate have most
often appealed to. The first kind of principle, the Autonomy
Principle, stresses the importance of forming one’s aesthetic
judgements in an autonomous manner: “One ought to arrive at
one”s aesthetic judgements through the application of
one’s own faculties and abilities’ (Nguyen 2020a). This is
taken (Nguyen 2020a) to derive from a related principle, “the
Requirement”, introduced by Hopkins (2011) that: “Having
the right to an aesthetic belief requires one to grasp the

aesthetic
 grounds for it”. Nevertheless, the
differences between the Autonomy Principle and the Requirement should
not be overlooked. The thought behind the Autonomy Principle is that
there is something valuable about autonomous aesthetic engagement such
that our aesthetic lives are going well when we endeavour to examine
the aesthetic value of an object for ourselves. The thought behind the
Requirement is that there is something interesting about aesthetic
belief formation which requires the possession of a certain kind of
comprehension of the reasons why an aesthetic judgement has been made.
The further assumption here is that such comprehension cannot be
attained unless we have engaged with the object (or a relevant
surrogate) for ourselves.



Whilst 
AP
 places demands that we gain direct access to the
object of aesthetic judgement, the Requirement demands that we grasp
the reasons why an aesthetic judgement has been made, and the Autonomy
Principle demands that we at least attempt to grasp the reasons why an
aesthetic judgement has been made, 
for ourselves
. Of course,
these principles are often related since, for example, we might think
that firsthand acquaintance of a certain kind is required for grasping
reasons in the relevant sense. Still, it is certainly possible to
accept one principle while rejecting the others. Another common theme
in terms of broader principles involves appeals to aesthetic
understanding (Page 2022), claiming that there would be something
problematic, or at least non-ideal, about forming aesthetic beliefs in
the absence of understanding. For example, Hills (2022) argues that
aesthetic understanding—where this is “factive and
requires a grasp of the reasons for” (2022: 26) a judgement that
a work has, or lacks, a certain kind of aesthetic value—is
required for aesthetic virtue. Again, this can easily be linked with

AP
. Someone could, for example, maintain that direct
acquaintance is required for forming aesthetic judgement since it is
the only means for acquiring the requisite level of understanding (and
it seems even more plausible that “grasping” aesthetic
grounds in Hopkins’ sense is going to require understanding). It
is, however, by no means guaranteed that a requirement for
understanding would entail a requirement for acquaintance (or vice
versa). One possible advantage of understanding-based principles is
that they allow us—in a way which 
AP
 does not—to
link pessimism in aesthetics with the parallel view in the moral case.
While it is implausible to take acquaintance (at least as standardly
interpreted) as a requirement for moral judgement, understanding has
frequently been touted as just that (Hills 2009; McGrath 2011).



Behind this narrow agreement on the importance of understanding,
though, there are some deep disagreements about why understanding is
so important. And, of course, the pessimist needs more than merely the
claim that aesthetic understanding is valuable (either in itself or as
a means to attaining some other value quality or state). It is, after
all, no part of the optimist’s position that everything valuable
in aesthetics can be attained via testimony (we discuss the value of
testimony further in
 
§7
).
 As Meskin (2004: 76) acknowledges, even the optimist will allow that
“there are things that testimony may never
provide—aesthetic experiences and artistic appreciation”.
The pessimist must, therefore, also give some account linking the
importance of understanding in aesthetics to their claims about the
illegitimacy or reliance on testimony.


3. Different Concerns



One thing that has become increasingly clear in recent years (Andow
2019: 33) is that it is surprisingly difficult to specify precisely
what claim the pessimist is making (and the optimist denying). We
initially formulated pessimism as something like the claim that we
cannot legitimately form aesthetic judgements on the basis of
testimony. At least three elements of this claim need to be clarified
though. First, what do we mean by “aesthetic judgement”?
Second, why is it that we cannot form legitimate aesthetic judgements
in this way? Third, how strictly should we interpret the
“cannot” here? We will see below that it is surprisingly
rare for a pessimist to maintain that we can 
never
 form a
legitimate aesthetic judgement on the basis of testimony, what about
the first two questions though?



In terms of the nature of aesthetic judgement, there is a clear
general divide between two camps. The first takes aesthetic judgement
to be belief, either in a narrow cognitivist sense (Hopkins 2006,
2011; Whiting 2015) or a broader sense which allows for certain
expressivist or quasi-realist equivalents (Robson 2023: 16–8).
The second takes the term “judgement” to capture something
like a state of appreciation. Understood in terms of appreciation the
debate is largely resolved as a matter of definition and no optimist
would want to maintain that we can, say, achieve a state of
appreciation—typically understood as something like experiencing
the qualities of a thing’ in such a way as to find them
“worthy or valuable” (Dickie 1974: 40)—on the basis
of testimony alone (Konigsberg 2012 is an apparent exception but this
is only because he understands “testimony” much more
broadly than the kind of pure testimony we’re focusing on). It
might easily seem that, as we have already seen Lopes (2014) suggest
with regards to 
AP
, the participants in this debate might
merely be talking past each other, with optimists maintaining that we
can legitimately form aesthetic beliefs on the basis of testimony and
pessimists denying that we can legitimately appreciate aesthetic
qualities on that basis. However, while we don’t deny that there
might be some level of misunderstanding within these debates, we think
that this irenic approach is mistaken for two reasons.



First, as highlighted by, e.g., Gorodeisky and Marcus (2018:
135–7) participants in this debate don’t typically take
themselves to just be arbitrarily stipulating a usage of
“aesthetic judgement” but, rather, to be picking out a
certain kind of mental state which our aesthetic talk typically
tracks. The substantive debate, then, will often concern whether we
can legitimately form these states on the basis of testimony. Robson
(2023: 16–8) maintains that these states are something like
beliefs, Todd (2004) takes them to be appreciative states and
Gorodeisky and Marcus (2018) opt for a hybrid view where these
correlates are typical appreciative states but, in some non-standard
cases, are beliefs (Briesen [forthcoming] defends a very different
kind of hybrid view). Second, while it is clear why reliance on
testimony would be ruled out on the second understanding of
“aesthetic judgement”, it is far from a trivial matter to
determine that testimony is a legitimate means for forming judgements
in the first sense (Robson 2017 argues that optimism is entailed by
treating aesthetic judgements as beliefs but this is controversial).
On the contrary, some pessimists have explicitly endorsed the first
interpretation.



Pessimists employing this understanding of “aesthetic
judgement” have raised various objections against deference to
aesthetic testimony, following (Hopkins 2011) these lines of
resistance have typically been divided into two broad camps:
“unavailability pessimism” and “unusability
pessimism”. Unavailability pessimists hold that aesthetic
testimony simply fails to meet the epistemic conditions that govern
the formation of legitimate aesthetic judgements, such that aesthetic
testimony fails to serve as a source of knowledge. Unusability
pessimists, by contrast, hold that aesthetic testimony may well yield
aesthetic knowledge but, nevertheless, there is a further
non-epistemic norm which prevents us from using aesthetic testimony as
a legitimate resource for forming such knowledge. Many theorists take
there to be an intuitive asymmetry between the status of mundane
testimony (that is, roughly, testimony about ordinary matters where
those who are not inclined towards any general testimonial scepticism
typically agree that testimony is unproblematic) and aesthetic
testimony. Further, as we have seen, these theorists also typically
take there to be a related intuitive asymmetry between the status of
first-hand and second-hand sources of aesthetic judgement. Unusability
pessimists take their further norm to explain these asymmetries. (For
more on the viability of an appeal to such intuitions see
 
§5.2
.)


3.1 Unavailability Pessimism



There are two primary ways in which one might approach unavailability
pessimism. One might hold that




(a)


we cannot attain knowledge, or even improve our epistemic
standing, through deference to aesthetic testimony because epistemic
terms such as truth and knowledge simply do not apply to this domain,
we should be aesthetic anti-realists (Mackie 1977).





Or that




(b)


whilst we should be aesthetic realists, and whilst epistemic terms
apply to the aesthetic domain, we cannot attain knowledge through
deference to aesthetic testimony, and this is simply entailed by the
nature of legitimate aesthetic judgement.




3.1.1 Anti-Realist Approaches



There are three notable ways in which one might launch an Anti-Realist
form of Unavailability Pessimism in line with
 
(a)

 (see Meskin 2006; Hopkins 2011). One might adopt an aesthetic error
theory and hold that all aesthetic claims are systematically false.
One might adopt aesthetic relativism and accept that there is
aesthetic truth, but the truth would here be relative to some set of
people. Alternatively one might adopt aesthetic expressivism and hold
that aesthetic claims express some non-cognitive state (typically
captured as pro- or con-attitudes) to the object in question..



The appeal of approaches aesthetic error theory to those who doubt the
value of aesthetic testimony is clear, we can expect aesthetic
testimony to have no epistemic value if aesthetic claims are incapable
of being true. However, this position would equally entail that there
can’t be true aesthetic claims on the basis of firsthand
experience. As such, while it would meet the letter of how pessimism
is often articulated, it would fail to capture a key asymmetry,
between firsthand and second-hand aesthetic judgements, which most
pessimists clearly take themselves to be committed to (see Meskin
2006).



An appeal to aesthetic relativism initially seems better able to
capture the asymmetry since the obvious concerns with accepting
testimony—about whether we, say, share a similar standard of
judgement to the testifier—don’t apply in the case of
firsthand judgement. Further, (as shall be explored in
 
§5.1
)
 it is possible that a generally held lay-person assumption of
relativism may account for why aesthetic testimony is often
intuitively assumed to be of little epistemic value. However, when it
comes to more sophisticated forms of relativism, the situation becomes
rather more complex (see
 
§4.1.1
).



Development of a sophisticated form of pessimistic appeal to
expressivism and the optimistic response, will be discussed in
 
§4.1.1
.
 For now, let us observe that a very basic expressivist view has the
power to accommodate certain pessimistic intuitions—upon this
view no propositions have been expressed and as such there can be no
propositional knowledge gained by such an expression. However, such a
basic version of expressivism is, as we’ll discuss in
 
§4.1.1
,
 often unappealing to the pessimist and the link between more
sophisticated versions of expressivism and pessimism is far less
clear.


3.1.2 Realist Approaches



If the pessimist wants to accept that there is aesthetic truth, and
that testimony can generally be a valuable epistemic resource then one
approach available to them is to defend the idea that there is
something particular about aesthetic judgement such that it is formed
in accordance with non-standard epistemic norms. Two plausible
candidates for such a non-standard epistemic norm are the Acquaintance
Principle and the Requirement (seen in
 
§2.2
).
 Although the plausibility of their candidacy rests on precisely how
these principles are to be understood. They might, for example,
reflect an epistemic norm which governs the formation of knowledge, or
they might simply reflect a norm of use—such that we can form
knowledge in this manner but we should not (Hopkins 2011 places them
both in the latter category). Alternatively, Lopes (2014) and Shelley
(2023) suggest they are a norm of an entirely different kind (we saw
in
 
§2.1

 that Wollheim himself took 
AP
 to be at least compatible with
an epistemic reading but our concern here is no longer with Wollheim
exegesis but with which version of the principle, if any, is
correct).



One way to develop the Requirement as a concern from unavailability
pessimism is to say that the formation of aesthetic judgement requires
a sufficient kind of understanding of that which we are invited to
accept on the basis of testimony. In order to accept testimony that
“
x
 is 
p
” where 
p
 represents
some aesthetic property or quality requires one to grasp both
“
x
” and “
p
”, and more
specifically, “
p
 as particularly instantiated in

x
”, and that this can only be attained through
first-hand acquaintance (see Tanner 2003; Todd 2004). One way to
develop this approach is to draw upon the idea that aesthetic
qualities are dependent upon non-aesthetic qualities, and that there
is no sufficient law-like connection between any set of non-aesthetic
qualities and the aesthetic qualities (following Sibley 1959, 1965).
On this line, each instance of an aesthetic property, beauty say, is
manifested or instantiated in a unique manner. Drawing from this one
might hold that we cannot truly comprehend the claim “
x

is beautiful” without having direct, first-hand acquaintance
with 
x
, and in turn one might insist that one cannot
legitimately form an aesthetic judgement or attain aesthetic knowledge
without this kind of comprehension.


3.1.3 “Moderately Optimistic” Approaches.



There is one final approach that might plausibly qualify as a form of
unavailability pessimism, as defined above. The interesting feature of
this approach, nevertheless, is that defenders typically label their
arguments in terms of “optimism”.



The distinction between optimism and pessimism was defined roughly in
 
Section 1

 as reflecting a divide between those who think we can legitimately
form aesthetic judgements on the basis of testimony, and those who
think we cannot, respectively (a distinction used in Hopkins 2011;
Whiting 2015; and Ransom 2019 amongst others). As we have seen
 (
§3.1.1
),
 this position has often been connected with a seemingly pessimistic
claim that aesthetic testimony has an asymmetrical epistemic status to
that of mundane testimony. However, it is important that we add some
nuance here. There are some self-identifying pessimists who explicitly
admit that there are rare cases where we may (legitimately) acquire
aesthetic knowledge on the basis of testimony (Hopkins 2011:154;
Wollheim 1980: 233). Moreover, there are certain self-identifying
optimists who will happily endorse the idea that aesthetic testimony
has an asymmetrical epistemic status to mundane testimony (and to
firsthand aesthetic experience).



Hopkins (2007: 613; 2011: 139–32) has suggested that we mark the
division between pessimism and optimism as follows: pessimists hold
that there is a principle or norm which is active in the aesthetic
case, but which is not active in the mundane case which thwarts the
possibility for aesthetic testimony to serve as a source of legitimate
aesthetic judgement while optimists deny this (see Robson 2023:
24–6 for discussion as to why this nuance may not be that
helpful.) If we were to accept Hopkin’s suggestion, an approach
which denies that there are any distinct/non-standard epistemic (or
non-epistemic) norms which govern the formation of aesthetic
knowledge, but which holds, nevertheless, that aesthetic testimony has
an asymmetrical epistemic status to that of mundane testimony is
relevantly optimistic. This is an approach which could insist that
aesthetic testimony fails (or at least typically fails) to meet the
standard conditions to serve as a legitimate source of aesthetic
knowledge.



There are two main positions which take this kind of approach, both
argue that the asymmetry between aesthetic and mundane testimony can
be accounted for by acknowledging the circumstances surrounding
aesthetic practice. The first holds that:




(i)


in assessing the evidence we find that aesthetic testifiers tend
to be unreliable.





The second holds that:




(ii)


as receivers of testimony we struggle to assess first-order
evidence available, we experience difficulty in determining the
reliability of such evidence, and this in turn may provide us with
sufficient reason to doubt that we can justifiably believe the
testimony.





The first kind of claim has been made by Aaron Meskin (2004, 2006). He
argues that aesthetic testifiers are more likely than non-aesthetic
testifiers to be both insincere (for reasons of snobbery) and
incompetent (for reasons of education)—and thus aesthetic
testimony is on the whole unreliable (Meskin 2004, 2006). He argues
that aesthetic testimony could, in principle, have the same epistemic
standing as the testimony of other domains but he insists that
aesthetic testimony on the whole tends to be inferior to the testimony
of other domains due to the fact that testifiers are typically
unreliable.



The second kind of claim (Wallbank 2021) holds that the real problem
with aesthetic testimony, is not that aesthetic testifiers are
typically unreliable, but rather that we don’t know how reliable
they are, we don’t have sufficient resources to test this.
Standard monitoring techniques aren’t available to us in
aesthetics (Nguyen 2020b; see also
 
§1.2

 on aesthetic principles of taste). That is not to say that there is
no evidence at all available, if testifier 
T
 makes an
aesthetic judgement that “x is beautiful”, and the
receiver of testimony 
R
 also experiences 
x
 as
beautiful, then, 
R
 will have some direct evidence to support
the idea that 
T
 has expertise (Sibley 1965). Yet whilst this
evidence is available, it does not seem to provide sufficient support
for our belief in the competence of the testifier, it only provides
sufficient support for the idea that the purported expert has a
similar standard of aesthetic taste to oneself, and it is not clear
why we should think our faculties of aesthetic taste are accurate.
(Irvin 2007 discusses a similar challenge, and possible methods
for addressing it, in a different context).


3.2 Unusability Pessimism



Unusability pessimists will accept that, under the right conditions,
knowledge can be attained via aesthetic testimony. Indeed, they could
go so far as to accept that there is no significant epistemic
difference between aesthetic and mundane testimony (though they are by
no means committed to doing so). However, they will nevertheless argue
that deference to aesthetic testimony violates a non-epistemic norm
which prevents the use of such knowledge. These theorists can accept
that one 
can
 form aesthetic beliefs, and indeed aesthetic
knowledge, through deference to aesthetic testimony, they argue
instead that (there are at least 
pro tanto
 reasons why) one

ought not
 to. Others take a more moderate view and argue
that, while acquiring knowledge in this way is perfectly permissible,
doing so would deprive of us some important value or goal.


3.2.1 Norms of Use



One of the most influential attempts to give a non-epistemic (but
still cognitive) version of pessimism is Hopkins’ (2011) appeal
to what he terms “norms of use”. Roughly speaking, these
are norms which determine whether it’s permissible to form a
belief on a particular subject but which don’t concern whether
the belief in question would count as knowledge. In Hopkins’
view, testimony can often make aesthetic knowledge available to us but
some further norm (or norms) of belief still makes it impermissible to
form a belief on this basis. Hopkins doesn’t take any clear
position on what norm this might be but considers some possibilities
including a non-epistemic version of 
AP
 (Hopkins 2011: 150)
and the other possibilities for the unusability pessimist we look at
below could also be taken as ways to fill in this gap (though, as we
will see, some of these make rather weaker claims than Hopkins’
contention that the beliefs in question would be impermissible).


3.2.2 Autonomy



An approach developed by Nguyen (2020a) rests on the Autonomy
Principle mentioned in
 
§2.2
.
 It broadly emphasises the importance of asserting aesthetic agency.
Key to Nguyen’s argument for this claim is the assumption that
what we primarily value about our aesthetic practice is forming
judgements as opposed to “getting our judgements right”
(Nguyen 2020a: 1129). On this account, the activity of forming
judgements is the point and purpose of our aesthetic engagement, not
epistemic gain; and whilst deference to aesthetic testimony can enable
us to improve our epistemic standing, it can thwart our aesthetic
engagement. One thing that emerges as important for this account is
the prolongation of appreciative aesthetic activity. Such prolongation
is purportedly promoted by the autonomous control of our attention,
whilst deference is seen to undermine it serving as an endpoint for
our appreciative aesthetic activities. Nguyen describes deference in
this context as comparable to a marathon runner taking a taxi to the
finish line. (Nguyen 2020a: 1147; see Friend 2023 for a critical yet
sympathetic discussion).


3.2.3 Authenticity and Aesthetic Personality



Another approach focuses on issues relating to authenticity and the
preservation of one’s aesthetic personality. This kind of
position can be seen in Levinson (2002; 2010), Riggle (2015) and
Bräuer (2023). Both Levinson (2002) and Riggle (2015) hold that
deferring to aesthetic testimony thwarts the preservation of
one’s aesthetic personality. The worry is that whilst we might
be tempted to accept certain kinds of testimony—particularly
from someone like a critic—if we were to do so we risk
undermining our own aesthetic sensibilities—and discarding
aesthetic judgements which we hold most dear. And they fear that
discarding such dearly held aesthetic judgements is tantamount to
discarding aspects of one’s personality. The thought is that our
aesthetic choices and preferences help define us and enable us to
orient our place in the world. To simply defer thwarts our
opportunities to have the kinds of meaningful attachments to artworks
which reflect our aesthetic personalities. Similarly, Bräuer
(2023) argues that we experience deference to aesthetic testimony as
problematic because (for better or for worse) we are attached to an
ideal of aesthetic authenticity. He argues that this ideal reflects
the sense in which we are called upon to live our lives in a manner
that is true to ourselves, and not an imitation of anyone else.


3.2.4 Aesthetic Development: A Moderate Approach



Some theorists have argued that deference undermines one’s
opportunities for aesthetic development; this is broadly reflected in
the work of Ransom (2019) and Lord (2018). This is roughly the concern
that deference to aesthetic testimony undermines the development of
our aesthetic faculties, sensibilities and skilful aesthetic
engagement since it takes away a prime opportunity for us to truly
understand and appreciate the aesthetic qualities in question. Insofar
as our opportunities to develop our aesthetic taste have been
undermined, aesthetic testimony can be seen to thwart our potential to
access further aesthetic truths. Deference is portrayed here as
comparable to offering a calculator to a child to help solve their
maths equation rather than letting them figure it out for themselves.
Something which would hinder them from developing the skill set
required for solving mathematical puzzles and prevent them from
attaining the requisite understanding to reliably apply what they
know. Interestingly both Lord and Ransom acknowledge that deference to
aesthetic testimony can be valuable at times and, in particular, that
it can be valuable for total novices in the field who might need some
help getting started. Indeed, given this acknowledgement Lord (2018)
even takes his account to be fairly optimistic in nature whilst
insisting that there is something non-ideal about deference to
aesthetic testimony nevertheless.


4. Optimistic Responses



Having introduced pessimistic concerns in the previous section, this
section will provide an optimistic response to each.


4.1 Optimistic Responses to Unavailability Pessimism


4.1.1 Anti-Realist Approaches: An Optimistic Response



Whilst aesthetic error theory and aesthetic relativism can accommodate
the pessimistic intuition that aesthetic testimony fails to serve as a
means of forming legitimate aesthetic judgement, aesthetic error
theory and relativism (or at least relativism of the crude kind which
would straightforwardly rule out appeals to aesthetic
testimony)—are commonly rejected by those within the aesthetic
testimony debate. It is typically accepted that there are aesthetic
truths and that these (or at least some significant subset of them)
don’t vary in their truth value between speakers. Indeed, it is
given these basic assumptions, that theorists typically set for
themselves the challenge of accounting for how aesthetic testimony
nevertheless seems to have (i) an asymmetrical epistemic status to the
testimony of mundane domains and (ii) an asymmetrical epistemic status
to first-hand acquaintance with the object (Meskin 2006:
112–113; Hopkins 2011: 141). Meskin (2006: 113) has also
highlighted that the relativist’s approach faces additional
difficulties in accounting for why aesthetic testimony may well have
an asymmetrical status—in both of the senses mentioned
above—in the context of like-minded valuers.



Interestingly the basic expressivist approach also appears to fall
upon similar hurdles to that facing error theory and relativism (see
Meskin 2006). The pessimist is (see the nuance of
 
§3.1.3
)
 often keen to observe an asymmetry between the epistemic status of
someone who has developed an aesthetic judgement on the basis of
aesthetic testimony and the status of someone who has first-hand
acquaintance with the object (Hopkins 2011). Nevertheless, if this
crude expressivist is right, there is no asymmetry here, neither
testimony nor acquaintance can be used as a source of knowledge
(Meskin 2007: 115). When it comes to more sophisticated forms of
relativism and expressivism, there have certainly been attempts to
link both of these to pessimism (see McGonigal 2006 and Andow
2015 for the former and Scruton 1974; Todd 2004; Franzén 2018;
and, arguably, Gorodeisky & Marcus 2018 for the latter).



Starting with expressivism, the expressivist can often (using the
machinery developed by, e.g., Blackburn 1993) happily appeal to the
key notions of truth, knowledge etc. that their realist counterparts
can use. As such, there’s no concern that the pessimist would
have to reject aesthetic knowledge in general alongside aesthetic
knowledge from testimony. However, the concern for such views
(discussed in, e.g., Meskin 2004: 71 and Robson & Sinclair 2023)
is that, once such realist notions are in place, it’s no longer
clear that expressivism entails pessimism. We aren’t aware of
any optimistic versions of expressivism in the aesthetic case but
it’s worth noting that one of the most prominent versions of
expressivism in ethics (Gibbard 1992: 174–88) allows that:





When conditions are right and someone else finds a norm independently
credible, I must take that as favoring my own accepting the norm,
(Gibbard 1992: 180)





which (given Gibbard’s view of moral judgements as favouring a
norm) commits him to an at least somewhat optimistic view. Further
Gibbard (1992: 52) seems inclined to paint a similar picture in the
aesthetic case. The challenge for the pessimist, then, is to formulate
a version of expressivism which follows the realist far enough to give
a plausible account of aesthetic truth, argumentation etc. but
doesn’t go so far as to also rule in appeals to aesthetic
testimony. Of course, even if their favoured version of expressivism
doesn’t entail pessimism, then the expressivist might still wish
to be a pessimist but they would need some independent reason (of the
kind we discuss in
 
§5
)
 for doing so.



What about relativism? A very similar challenge awaits here. The kind
of crude relativism which easily leads to pessimism is,
understandably, unpopular with aestheticians. Rather, any plausible
form of relativism will have to account for (amongst much else) the
widespread level of aesthetic agreement, the importance of aesthetic
expertise and our practice of offering reasons for and against
aesthetic judgements (for discussion of some contemporary forms of
relativism see, e.g., Young 2009 and Goldman 1995; for some historical
context see Korsmeyer 1975). Once we have developed relativism this
far, though, it isn’t always an easy matter to see why the
relativist should be a pessimist. For example, as Meskin (2006: 113)
highlights, the sophisticated relativist faces the difficulty of
accounting for why aesthetic testimony may well have an asymmetrical
status—in both of the senses mentioned above—in the
context of like-minded valuers. And even more pessimistic relativists
do tend to be rather attenuated in their pessimism; for example, Andow
(2015: 217) seems happy to allow that the relativist views he discuss
can sometimes enable us to legitimately arrive at aesthetic knowledge
via testimony.


4.1.2 Realist Approaches: An Optimistic Response



Let’s begin by considering the idea that aesthetic judgement is
governed by a distinctive kind of epistemic norm which requires a
certain kind of comprehension of the judgement in question—a
kind which can only be attained through acquaintance. Budd (2003:
378–8) takes Tanner (2003: 33) to be suggesting a pessimistic
argument of this kind but, as Budd (2003: 387–8) points out, it
isn’t clear why understanding the claim that “
x

is beautiful” would require the experience of the determinate
beauty which 
x
 possesses rather than just having a reasonable
general grasp of the determinable property of beauty (just as
understanding “
x
 is green” might require our
having some experience of greenness but doesn’t require our
having experienced 
x
’s particular determinate share of
greenness). In order to ascribe a quality to something, we typically
need basic familiarity with the concept being ascribed to the object
of appreciation. We do not need familiarity or an understanding about
how the specific quality is realised in the object of appreciation in
order to form the belief that the quality is present (Budd 2003: 388).
Lord (2018) argues for the importance of being acquainted with a
particular determinate aesthetic property but he doesn’t take
this to place any limit (let alone an epistemic limit) on the
permissibility of our aesthetic judgements. The burden of proof
remains on the pessimist to explain why we would need a distinctive
kind of comprehension for aesthetic belief formation, and to explain
why the standards for knowledge in the aesthetic case are different
from those in mundane cases.


4.1.3 “Moderately Optimistic Approaches”: A (More) Optimistic Response



The primary difficulty facing accounts which insist on (i)—the
unreliability of aesthetic testifiers—is the difficulty we face
in verifying this claim (see
 
§3.1.3
).
 The primary difficulty facing accounts which insist on (ii)—the
absence of viable information to identify the reliability of aesthetic
testifiers—is the difficulty we face in maintaining the
possibility of aesthetic knowledge through other means. As noted by
Hopkins (2011: 141) it is difficult for the latter kind of accounts to
proceed without mandating agnosticism. Upon this account there seems
to be no real epistemic asymmetry between aesthetic testimony and
one’s first-hand perception (particularly since recent
discussion (see, e.g., Irvin 2014 and Lopes 2014) has provided a
number of challenges to our reliability at judging our own aesthetic
competence).


4.2 Optimistic Responses to Unusability Pessimism


4.2.1 Norms of Use: An Optimistic Response



The most common optimistic responses to norms of use are based around
the objection which Hopkins himself considers near the start of this
discussion (2011: 145). That is, the challenge of defending the view
according to which there can be beliefs governed by non-epistemic
norms. It is quite common (Simion et al. 2016) for epistemic norms (or
aims or functions but these, otherwise significant, differences are of
little import here) to be taken to constitutively govern beliefs, such
that something even partially governed by non-epistemic norms just
couldn’t be a belief. Indeed, it is parallel considerations
which lead Hills (2015) to consider positing a new kind of mental
state (uliefs) when it comes to moral judgements, which she takes to
be constitutively governed by understanding (rather than knowledge).
Hopkins’ own defence here focuses (2011: 146–8) on arguing
that there are familiar examples where we are used to employing
non-epistemic norms of belief formation. However, there have been a
number of challenges (McKinnon 2017) to the claim that these examples
really involve any non-epistemic norms.



Of course, the view that aesthetic judgements are beliefs
doesn’t seem as core to the unusability position as their
insistence on non-epistemic norms. Given this, it is open to them to
defend their position by identifying aesthetic judgements with some
novel cognitive state (such as Hills’ uliefs) or to embrace some
kind of sophisticated non-cognitivism about aesthetic judgements.
Finally, even if we did accept that there could be such non-epistemic
norms (whether of belief or otherwise), there still remains the
further challenge of explaining which norms are active and why. Much
recent work in the aesthetic testimony debate could be seen as an
attempt to answer these challenges.


4.2.2 Autonomy: An Optimistic Response



One difficulty with the concern from autonomy is that the argument is
more complex than it might first seem. It might, at first seem that
autonomy is of primary value for our aesthetic engagements and
deference undermines this. Nevertheless, at various points in
Nguyen’s (2020a) argument it appears that prolonged aesthetic
engagement (appreciative activity) is of primary value in our
aesthetic lives, autonomy is regarded the best way in which we can
achieve it (and deference is seen to undermine it). In which case it
seems that autonomy emerges as only instrumentally valuable, a means
towards attaining prolonged aesthetic activity. When engaging with
this argument we need to clarify precisely how valuable autonomous
activity is, how valuable prolonged aesthetic activity is; we also
need to clarify what kind of value are talking about. Moreover, if
prolongation of aesthetic activity is of primary importance, it is
also worth highlighting that deferential engagements do not
necessarily undermine prolonged activity (see
 
§4.2.4
).
 Deference permits us the same opportunities for aesthetic engagement
as non-deference, the only difference is that we haven’t
suspended judgement on the matter first.


4.2.3 Authenticity and Aesthetic Personality: An Optimistic Response



When facing the pessimistic concern that deference to aesthetic
testimony damages the meaningful aesthetic attachments that one forms
to objects in a manner which undermines our aesthetic personalities,
one thing we naturally need clarification on is the nature of an
aesthetic personality. Aesthetic personality roughly seems to reflect
one’s aesthetic tastes, sensibilities, and more broadly
one’s disposition to form certain kinds of aesthetic judgements.
But in that case, note that one’s aesthetic personalities
change, mature and develop all the time. It would be odd to insist
that we ought to resist any aesthetic transformation or development,
we certainly would not want to retain the same aesthetic attachments
that we have had since childhood. Defenders of this kind of account
need to clarify why discarding aesthetic judgements on the basis of
aesthetic testimony is problematic—as we seem to discard
judgements that we once held dear all the time.



Bräuer’s (2023) approach is a little different. Bräuer
argues that aesthetic testimony possesses its asymmetrical epistemic
status not because it forces us to abandon certain aesthetic
attachments, but because it forces us to make aesthetic judgements
which fail to reflect who we are—and for better or for
worse—we are attached to an ideal of authenticity. However,
clarification as to how exactly our authenticity is undermined here
would be helpful.


4.2.4 Aesthetic Development: A (More) Optimistic Response



Turning to the concern that deference to aesthetic testimony thwarts
our aesthetic development. It is important to once again observe
(following
 
§4.2.2
)
 that attaining some information won’t necessarily deter one
from pursuing the matter, for oneself at a later date. In fact, within
the aesthetic domain, hearing testimony on a certain matter might be
just the thing to motivate someone lacking all confidence in their own
aesthetic judgement to engage with the matter for themselves. Wallbank
and Reisner (2020) bring this out in a paper which argues that
deference can be an epistemic facilitator, accepting the belief in
question can be a launchpad for further investigation and engagement.
Even if deference to testimony entails accepting falsehoods, it
might—in the long-run—prove to be epistemically beneficial
in virtue of serving as a launchpad for further engagement hereby
giving us the potential to access to further truths. As Ransom (2019)
and Lord (2018) themselves acknowledge, deference to aesthetic
testimony emerges here as particularly beneficial for individuals who
are particularly aesthetically naive and in need of encouragement.


5. Arguments for Pessimism



In the earliest writing on aesthetic testimony, there was a notable
paucity of arguments for pessimism. Kant’s mention of testimony
quickly moves on to discussion of the illegitimacy of inferring
aesthetic judgements from general principles, and he seems to focus
the positive arguments he offers entirely on the latter. Similarly,
Wollheim (1980: 233) seems to take 
AP
, and by extension
pessimism, to be (something close to) a truism which needs to be
accommodated by any view of the aesthetic, rather than a controversial
thesis in need of defence (similar things occur in, e.g., Tormey 1973:
39 and Pettit 1983: 25). Given the range of recent defences of
optimism, though, the need for pessimists to argue for their view has
become rather more salient of late.


5.1 Reluctance to form aesthetic judgements



One (often tacit) argument in support of pessimism is our tendency to
avoid forming—or at least being reluctant to
form—aesthetic judgements on the basis of testimony. If, as Kant
(1790: Part I, Div. 1, §33 [1914: 157]), and Nguyen (2020a: 1128)
suggest, we are less willing to form aesthetic judgements on the basis
of testimony (when compared to forming mundane judgements on that
basis or aesthetic judgements on the basis of first-hand experience),
then this stands in need of explanation. And, we might suggest, a
tacit folk acceptance of pessimism is the best explanation (for
discussion of empirical work on “folk” views of aesthetic
testimony see, e.g., Andow 2019 and Cova, Garcia, & Liao 2015:
931–2). There are a number of possible responses here. First,
Meskin (2004: 81) suggests that we might equally well explain these
facts not by appeal to pessimism but to a mistaken folk belief which
is taken to entail pessimism. There are certain apparent folk
beliefs—such as Meskin’s example of the endorsement of
certain crude forms of aesthetic relativism—which would seem to
legitimise pessimism but which are almost universally rejected by
philosophically minded aestheticians. A different approach is
suggested by Robson (2014: 2517–24) who questions whether the
required explanandum is even genuine, suggesting that we are
typically poor judges of the sources of our own (aesthetic)
judgements and that there is empirical evidence to suggest that we
form aesthetic beliefs on the basis of testimony rather more than
we’re inclined to think.


5.2 Appeals to Cases



Probably the most common kind of argument for pessimism involves the
appeal to our intuitions concerning cases. For example, Hills (2022:
22) ask us to





Suppose the editor of Sight and Sound gives Evelyn a piece of
“pure” aesthetic testimony, e.g., that Citizen Kane is a
great film—one of the greatest films of all time. It would be
odd for her simply to take his word, to form a confident opinion that
it is excellent.





(for similar cases see, e.g., Whiting 2015: 91; Hopkins 2011: 138; and
Hazlett 2017: 49). The general idea here being that our intuition that
someone does, or would do, something wrong by forming an aesthetic
judgement in these cases is best explained by the truth of pessimism.
Three kinds of response to such cases are worth considering.



First, there is the hardnosed approach of simply denying that there is
anything problematic about the judgements in question. However, it is
rare to see a view of this kind actually defended. This is, perhaps,
surprising given that there has recently been considerable scepticism
expressed elsewhere about the general practice of philosophers
appealing to intuitions concerning particular cases (Weinberg 2007).
Further, there is empirical evidence (Andow 2019) to suggest that the
folk are rather more sceptical about both testimony in general, and
aesthetic judgement in general, than most philosophers are inclined to
think appropriate.



A second, and far more common, kind of response is to argue that these
intuitions can be accommodated within an optimistic framework.
Remember that the optimist is not, qua optimist, committed to taking
every case of reliance on aesthetic testimony as legitimate. We might,
for example, wonder whether, in the case mentioned above, we have
quite mundane grounds for thinking that the editor of Sight and Sound
is unreliable (or unreliable on topics of this kind or…). More
general responses have also been proposed. For example, Robson (2015a)
argues that our intuitions about these cases can be accommodated by an
optimist who is willing to endorse a certain form of epistemic
contextualism. An optimist of this ilk can maintain, roughly, that we
don’t count as knowing in these cases but only because of the
very same contextual factors which would also produce this result in
non-aesthetic cases. Of course, the challenge then becomes explaining
why these factors seem to be operative more often in the aesthetic
case than elsewhere. A different response of this kind allows that
there our intuition in these cases do show some genuine weakness of
aesthetic testimony but that this isn’t enough to lead to a
full-on endorsement of pessimism. As we saw in
 
§4.2.4
,
 there are a variety of positions (such as Meskin’s 2004 &
2006 unreliability view) which admit that significant challenges
arise for forming judgements based on aesthetic testimony but which
are still routinely classified as optimistic. Classification aside,
one concern here is that intuitions about such cases tend to stay
fairly stable even when we are explicitly assured about the
testifier’s bona fides (as we are in the cases presented by,
e.g., Hazlett 2017: 49).



Finally, it has been argued, as we will see in the next section, that
these arguments have tended to rely on a very narrow range of cases
(Nguyen 2017) and that a full assessment of the evidence will require
widening our diet of cases considerably. And, as we will see, some
have argued that such an approach undermines the pessimist’s
arguments or even provides a positive reason for endorsing
optimism.


5.3 Arguments from Assertion



Another prominent argument for pessimism concerns the (apparent)
impermissibility of certain assertions. It seems unremarkable to claim
that, e.g., “Lisbon is the capital of Portugal”,
“the Korean war started in 1950” or “the bus stop is
on Main Street” entirely on the basis of testimony. By contrast,
if someone where to assert “Guernica is harrowing” without
having experienced the object for themselves, something would seem
amiss. As with the kinds of cases discussed above, the thought is
typically that these intuitions are best accounted for by appeal to
some form of pessimism (Andow 2015: 211–2; Mothersill 1994: 160;
and Gorodeisky 2010: 53). Indeed, a link to 
AP
 seems an
obvious move here, suggesting that such assertions are problematic in
the absence of experience for the simple reason that the beliefs in
question would also be problematic.



As with the cases above, it is open to the optimist to maintain that
the assertions in question are unproblematic and that intuitions to
the contrary are simply based on misleading folk theories or similar.
However, optimists typically concede that aesthetic
assertions—or at least aesthetic assertions of a particular
kind—are illegitimate on the basis of testimony but try to offer
some explanation of this which doesn’t impugn the corresponding
judgements. And a number of optimist-friendly explanations have been
suggested. Lackey (2011) takes this to be the result of a more general
phenomenon which prevents our making “isolated second-hand
assertions” in certain cases even though there is no concern
with the status of the corresponding belief, Franzén (2018:
681) suggests that aesthetic assertions are “expressive
affective states of mind” and Robson (2015b) that assertions of
the relevant kind carry a misleading implicature regarding the source
of the speaker’s judgements.



Each kind or proposal raises its own concerns though. Lackey proposes
a norm of assertion which requires significant revisions of some
prominent theories and the non-aesthetic examples she uses to motivate
it are far from uncontroversial (see McKinnon 2017). Franzén
suggests a semantics which looks to closely match some contemporary
expressivist claims but which, as he himself (2018: 680) points out,
it is one which doesn’t sit well with other aspects of
contemporary expressivist views. Robson proposes that the infelicity
results from some kind of implicature but (as discussed in
Franzén 2018: 670–1 and Ninan 2014: 297) these cases
don’t appear to reflect any standard model of implicature or
similar phenomena. For example, “it is a
characteristic—some would say defining—feature of
conversational implicatures that they are cancelable” (2014:
297) but this doesn’t seem to apply here. If I say “Jill
has four cars (but I don”t mean to suggest that she has only
four)’ I cancel the standard conversational implicature that
Jill has exactly four cars. However, explicitly adding “but I
haven”t seen it’ to a claim about the beauty of a painting
seems to merely highlight, rather than remove, the infelicity.


6. Arguments for Optimism



We have seen above that pessimism has sometimes been assumed, rather
than argued for, in the literature on aesthetic testimony but it has
also been suggested that the reverse should be the case. That is, that
we should assume optimism (of quite an extreme flavour) unless we have
good arguments to the contrary. After all, both the optimist and the
pessimist tend to accept that most kinds of judgement we make are
governed by norms which permit our forming judgements via testimony.
It has been suggested that the requirements for the legitimacy of
testimony in a particular domain are rather limited. Indeed, Fricker
(2006: 225) goes so far as to suggest that we





are essentially social creatures, and it is not clear that we do or
could possess any knowledge at all which is not in some way, perhaps
obliquely, dependent on testimony.





Robson’s (2017) case for favouring optimism goes even further,
arguing that, at least if we take aesthetic judgements to be anything
like beliefs as traditionally understood, then optimism is pretty much
entailed by the nature of aesthetic judgement (Todd 2004 seems to
share this view but takes it as a reason to reject the claim that
aesthetic judgements are belief-like). Beyond such concerns about
“default status”, though, there are also some positive
arguments which have been offered in favour of optimism.


6.1 The Range of Aesthetic Judgements



One common line of argument concerns certain kinds of aesthetic
judgement where pessimist intuitions seem (at the very least) to be
significantly less common. These include judgements of natural beauty
(Meskin 2004: 88–9), of the aesthetic status of lost works and
performances (Laetz 2008: 355), of mathematical proofs (Meskin 2004:
89–90), and judgements of aesthetic matters which seem to be
common knowledge (Levinson 2005: 213). In all of these cases, it has
been suggested that our intuitions favour optimism or, at the very
least, favour pessimism considerably less than the standard kind of
case (often featuring extant but non-canonical works of art).



A first kind of pessimist response denies that (some of) these cases
are genuine exceptions. That is because the judgement in question
either fail to be legitimate or fail to be aesthetic (or both). The
claim that these aren’t genuinely aesthetic judgements seems
rather more plausible in some cases than others. There is, for
example, already independent debate about whether apparent ascriptions
of beauty to mathematical proofs are genuinely aesthetic or, for
example, merely metaphorical ways of expressing certain non-aesthetic
claims concerning simplicity and the like (for a sceptical discussion
of this possibility see Inglis & Aberdein 2015). Even with cases
such as lost works, though (which might seem paradigmatically
aesthetic), there are still things which could be said. First, it is
open to pessimists to maintain that these claims, while aesthetic,
aren’t genuinely aesthetic 
judgements
. For example, as
we saw in
 
§2

 the kind of hybrid view which (Gorodeisky & Marcus 2018) propose,
aesthetic judgements are appreciation-like states, rather than
belief-like states but our aesthetic assertions still sometimes
express beliefs (which they allow can be legitimately formed on the
basis of testimony). The challenge for such an approach would be to
give a non-ad hoc explanation of why the assertions in these
particular domains are exceptional in this way. A second approach is
to maintain that the claims involved here are actually elliptical for
some non-aesthetic claim. As Blackburn (1998: 60) points out, there
are contexts in which it seems that someone’s apparent report of
their aesthetic judgement will really be a self-effacing report of
what they take, e.g., the general consensus on this matter to be. If
this was what was happening in these cases, then this would be no
problem for the pessimist as they are not committed to denying that we
can legitimately learn 
that
 others hold certain aesthetic
views on the basis of testimony. Further, in some cases at least, it
might seem desirable to adopt paraphrases of these kinds. If someone
were to maintain that “Cleopatra was the most beautiful woman in
the ancient world”, then it would be very natural, and certainly
more charitable, to interpret this as something like a report of her
reputation, rather than as a serious attempt to make a comparative
aesthetic judgement in relation to millions of other, largely entirely
unknown, individuals (other cases, such as those involving natural
beauty, are harder to motivate though).



A second general kind of response stresses that our intuitions about
such cases are, of course, compatible with an attenuated version of
pessimism. Hopkins (2011: 153–4), for example, mentions that the
pessimistic norms he proposes don’t hold come what may but,
rather, “lapse” under certain circumstances. And other
pessimists might, to similar effect, say that the norms they propose
are operative, but not violated in these cases, since they merely make
it harder, rather than impossible, to form legitimate aesthetic
judgements on the basis of testimony. Still, the optimist might
reasonably ask for an explanation as to why the pessimist’s
norms lapse with respect to, or otherwise fail to capture, these
particular cases.


6.2 Aesthetic Practice



There also seem to be cases where what we might term our aesthetic
practice speaks in favour of optimism. The most common examples here
involve our tendency to defer—when it comes to which artworks we
engage with—to the recommendations of friends and critics (see
Gorodeisky 2010: 60 and Hopkins 2011: 153). Most of us would, for
example, be more likely to watch a particular film if it was praised
by a friend or lauded by a trusted critic. The benefit of such cases
for the optimist shouldn’t be overstated though. One reason for
caution is that these recommendations often involve more than pure
aesthetic testimony. Professional critics are typically employed not
merely to give an overall verdict on a work but to give reasons in
support of this and, more generally, to present descriptive
information about the work (though the importance of overall
“Rotten Tomatoes” scores and similar is also worth
considering here). Similarly, friends who provide recommendations will
often give reasons for doing so and even comparisons to other works
they know you’re already familiar with. Further, we might think
that such recommendations can legitimise our behaviour without
providing us with a particularly high degree of warrant. If we are
deciding which of two unfamiliar novels to read, then it seems
reasonable—in the absence of any other “tie
breakers”—to act on the basis of a friend’s
testimony, even if we think that this testimony provides very little
in the way of warrant. However, as Gorodeisky (2010: 60) points out,
we can sometimes undergo significant outlays—in terms of time,
money and so forth—to engage with art works which have been
praised by friends or critics. Behaviour of this kind seems hard to
account for unless we are at least close to 
knowing
 that the
work in question has aesthetic merit (Gorodeisky uses this as part of
an argument for unusability pessimism but it could easily be adapted
into the service of optimism).



While deferral to such recommendations is the most commonly cited
practice, it isn’t the only one which has been discussed in the
literature. For example, Nguyen (2017: 22–5) highlights the
various roles which testimony plays within aesthetic education and
Laetz (2008: 361–2) points to our tendency to enlist the
testimony of others in reaching a judgement concerning a piece about
which our own initial feelings are ambivalent. What should the
pessimist say about such practices? It is open to the pessimist to
deny that these practices really are legitimate but—so far as we
are aware—this approach hasn’t been explored. The typical
response is, rather, to aim to accommodate these practices within a
pessimistic framework. One way of doing so—paralleling the
approach commonly taken with apparently legitimate aesthetic
judgements formed on the basis of testimony—is to simply allow
that these cases highlight exceptions to the relevant pessimistic
norms or cases where such norms lapse (Hopkins 2011: 153–4).
Another approach would involve arguing that some aspect(s) of our
aesthetic practice which seems best explained by pessimism (see
Whiting 2015; Nguyen 2017: 25). If this were the case, then it would,
again, become a question of balancing these competing considerations
and determining which account (whether optimistic or pessimistic) is
best able to accommodate them.


7. The Value of Testimony



One final point of consideration worth acknowledging is the
possibility that deference to aesthetic testimony could in fact be
aesthetically (or otherwise) valuable. Much previous discussion of
aesthetic testimony (Meskin 2004: 76; Ransom 2019: 426)—from
both optimists and pessimists—has highlighted that there is much
of value which is lost when we defer to testimony rather than engaging
with works themselves (most obviously, aesthetic

appreciation
). However, there might also be under-recognised
sources of value here (Wallbank & Robson 2022). The literature on
trust in testimony has frequently noted that deference to testimony
plays a valuable social role. It can serve as a socially bonding
experience (Faulkner 2007; Jones 1996), and it is often understood as
a means of fostering interpersonal relationships and ensuring social
cooperation. (Relatedly distrust and non-trust in someone’s
testimony can often be seen to serve a socially negative role [Hazlett
2017]). The idea here is that if 
A
 were to testify to

B
 that 
p
, 
A
 would be inviting 
B
 to
trust that she has done the relevant epistemic work and is
sufficiently competent and sincere, such that 
B
 may simply
take 
A
’s word for it that 
p
. If 
B

were to reject this invitation, 
A
 would arguably have some
reason to feel insulted by the implicit discredit to her sincerity or
competence. Note also that whilst the literature typically focuses on
the fostering of inter-personal relationships, some accounts of trust
accommodate the possibility that this socially-bonding experience can
occur between an individual and a collective (Wallbank 2021).
Accordingly, an individual’s trust in a culturally accepted
aesthetic judgement—say, that the works of Mozart are
magnificent—might then reflect a community-forming experience,
group cohesion, and may strengthen a collective sense of identity.
Considering this in light of recent work in aesthetics concerning the
possibility of an intimate relationship between aesthetic value and
social value (Riggle 2022; Cross forthcoming), it is interesting to
observe that there is opportunity for researchers to pave the way
towards advocating for the idea that deference to aesthetic testimony
is not merely aesthetically permissible, and not merely useful as a
temporary tool for aesthetic development, but it is in itself
aesthetically valuable. (See King 2021 for discussion of nuances
concerning the grounding of aesthetic judgement and McShane 2018 for
arguments that deference to testimony in ethics can be positively
valuable.)






Bibliography




Andow, James, 2015, “A Semantic Solution to the Problem with
Aesthetic Testimony”, 
Acta Analytica
, 30(2):
211–218. doi:10.1007/s12136-014-0238-4


–––, 2019, “Aesthetic Testimony and
Experimental Philosophy”, in 
Advances in Experimental
Philosophy of Aesthetics
, Florian Cova and Sébastien
Réhault (eds), (Advances in Experimental Philosophy), London:
Bloomsbury Academic, 33–58 (ch. 2).


Augustine of Hippo, [2010], 
Revisions
, Roland Teske
(ed.). Boniface Ramsey (trans.), (The Works of Saint Augustine), New
York: New City Press, 2010.


Beardsley, Monroe C., 1962, “On the Generality of Critical
Reasons”, 
The Journal of Philosophy
, 59(18):
477–486. doi:10.2307/2023219


Blackburn, Simon, 1993, 
Essays in Quasi-Realism
, Oxford:
Oxford University Press.


–––, 1998, 
Ruling Passions: A Theory of
Practical Reasoning
, Oxford: Clarendon Press.
doi:10.1093/oso/9780198247852.001.0001


Bräuer, Felix, 2023, “Aesthetic Testimony and Aesthetic
Authenticity”, 
British Journal of Aesthetics
, 63(3):
395–416. doi:10.1093/aesthj/ayac045


Briesen, Jochen, forthcoming, “Aesthetic Judgments,
Evaluative Content, and (Hybrid) Expressivism”,

Ergo
.


Budd, Malcolm, 2003, “The Acquaintance Principle”,

The British Journal of Aesthetics
, 43(4): 386–392.
doi:10.1093/bjaesthetics/43.4.386


Burge, Tyler, 1993, “Content Preservation”, 
The
Philosophical Review
, 102(4): 457–488.
doi:10.2307/2185680


Coady, C. A. J., 1992, 
Testimony: A Philosophical Study
,
Oxford: Clarendon Press. doi:10.1093/0198235518.001.0001


Cova, Florian; Garcia, Amanda & Liao, Shen-yi, 2015,
“Experimental Philosophy of Aesthetics”, Philosophy Compass 10(12):
927–939.


Cross, Anthony, (forthcoming), “Social Aesthetic Goods and
Aesthetic Alienation”, 
Philosophers Imprint
.


Eaton, Marcia Muelder, 1994, “The Intrinsic,
Non-Supervenient Nature of Aesthetic Properties”, 
The
Journal of Aesthetics and Art Criticism
, 52(4): 383–397.
doi:10.2307/432026


Faulkner, Paul, 2007, “On Telling and Trusting”,

Mind
, 116(464): 875–902. doi:10.1093/mind/fzm875


–––, 2011, 
Knowledge on Trust
, Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
doi:10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199589784.001.0001


Franzén, Nils, 2018, “Aesthetic Evaluation and
First-Hand Experience”, 
Australasian Journal of
Philosophy
, 96(4): 669–682.
doi:10.1080/00048402.2018.1425729


Friend, Stacie, 2023, “Aesthetic Appreciation without
Inversion”, 
Aristotelian Society Supplementary Volume
,
97(1): 202–220. doi:10.1093/arisup/akad004


Fricker, Elizabeth, 2006, “Testimony and Epistemic Autonomy” in

The Epistemology of Testimony
, Jennifer Lackey and Ernest
Sosa (eds), Oxford: Oxford University Press, 225–50.


Fricker, Miranda, 2012, “Group Testimony? The Making of A
Collective Good Informant”, 
Philosophy and Phenomenological
Research
, 84(2): 249–276.
doi:10.1111/j.1933-1592.2011.00565.x


Gibbard, Allan, 1992, Wise Choices, Apt Feelings: A Theory of
Normative Judgement. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press.


Goldman, Alan H., 1995, 
Aesthetic Value
, Boulder, CO:
Westview Press.


Gorodeisky, Keren, 2010, “A New Look at Kant’s View of
Aesthetic Testimony”, 
The British Journal of
Aesthetics
, 50(1): 53–70. doi:10.1093/aesthj/ayp052


Gorodeisky, Keren and Eric Marcus, 2018, “Aesthetic
Rationality”, 
The Journal of Philosophy
, 115(3):
113–140. doi:10.5840/jphil201811538


Hanson, Louise, 2015, “Conceptual Art and the Acquaintance
Principle”, 
The Journal of Aesthetics and Art
Criticism
, 73(3): 247–258. doi:10.1111/jaac.12181


Hazlett, Allan, 2017, “Towards Social Accounts of
Testimonial Asymmetries”, 
Noûs
, 51(1):
49–73. doi:10.1111/nous.12098


Hills, Alison, 2009, “Moral Testimony and Moral
Epistemology”, 
Ethics
, 120(1): 94–127.
doi:10.1086/648610


–––, 2015, “Cognitivism about Moral Judgement”,

Oxford Studies in Metaethics
 10, Russ Shafer-Landau (ed.),
Oxford: Oxford University Press.


–––, 2017, “Aesthetic
Understanding”, in 
Making Sense of the World: New Essays on
the Philosophy of Understanding
, Stephen R. Grimm (ed.), New
York: Oxford University Press, 159–176 (ch. 8).


–––, 2022, “Aesthetic Testimony,
Understanding and Virtue”, 
Noûs
, 56(1):
21–39. doi:10.1111/nous.12344


Hopkins, Robert, 2000, “Beauty and Testimony”, in

Philosophy, the Good, the True, and the Beautiful
, Anthony
O’Hear (ed.), (Royal Institute of Philosophy Supplement 47),
Cambridge/New York: Cambridge University Press, 209–236.


–––, 2001, “Kant, Quasi‐Realism, and
the Autonomy of Aesthetic Judgement”, 
European Journal of
Philosophy
, 9(2): 166–189. doi:10.1111/1468-0378.00134


–––, 2006, “How to Form Aesthetic Belief:
Interpreting the Acquaintance Principle”, 
Postgraduate
Journal of Aesthetics
, 3(3): 85–99.
 [
Hopkins 2006 available online
]


–––, 2007, “What Is Wrong With Moral
Testimony?”, 
Philosophy and Phenomenological Research
,
74(3): 611–634. doi:10.1111/j.1933-1592.2007.00042.x


–––, 2011, “How to Be a Pessimist about
Aesthetic Testimony”, 
Journal of Philosophy
, 108(3):
138–157. doi:10.5840/jphil201110838


Hume, David, 1757, “Of the Standard of Taste”, in his

Four Dissertations
, London: A. Millar, essay 4.
 [
Hume 1757 available online
]


Hutcheson, Francis, 1725/26, 
An Inquiry into the Original of
Our Ideas of Beauty and Virtue: In Two Treatises
, London: Printed
by J. Darby. Second revised edition, 1726. Second edition reprinted,
2004, Wolfgang Leidhold (ed.), Indianapolis, IN: Liberty Fund.
 [
Hutcheson 1725/26 [2004] available online
]


Inglis, Matthew and Andrew Aberdein, 2015, “Beauty Is Not
Simplicity: An Analysis of Mathematicians’ Proof
Appraisals”, 
Philosophia Mathematica
, 23(1):
87–109. doi:10.1093/philmat/nku014


Irvin, Sherri, (2007), “Forgery and the corruption of
aesthetic understanding”, 
Canadian Journal of
Philosophy
, 37(2): 283–304.


–––, 2014, “Is Aesthetic Experience
Possible?”, in 
Aesthetics and the Sciences of Mind
,
Greg Currie, Matthew Kieran, Aaron Meskin, and Jon Robson (eds),
Oxford University Press, 37–56 (ch. 2).
doi:10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199669639.003.0003


Jay, Christopher, 2016, “Testimony, Belief, and Non-Doxastic
Faith: The Humean Argument for Religious Fictionalism”,

Religious Studies
, 52(2): 247–261.
doi:10.1017/S0034412515000177


Jones, Karen, 1996, “Trust as an Affective Attitude”,

Ethics
, 107(1): 4–25. doi:10.1086/233694


Kant, Immanuel, 1790 [1914], 
Kritik der Urteilskraft
,
Berlin und Libau: Lagarde und Friedrich. Translated as 
Critique of
Judgement
, J. H. Bernard (trans.), London: Macmillan, 1892;
second edition 1914.
 [
Kant 1790 [1914] available online
]


King, Alex, 2021, “Reasons, normativity, and value in aesthetics”,

Philosophy Compass
 17(1): 1–17.


Konigsberg, Amir, 2012, “The Acquaintance Principle,
Aesthetic Autonomy, and Aesthetic Appreciation”, 
The British
Journal of Aesthetics
, 52(2): 153–168.
doi:10.1093/aesthj/ays003


Korsmeyer, Carolyn Wilker, 1975, “Relativism and
Hutcheson’s Aesthetic Theory”, 
Journal of the History
of Ideas
, 36(2): 319–330. doi:10.2307/2708930


Lackey, Jennifer, 2006a, “Knowing from Testimony”,

Philosophy Compass
, 1(5): 432–448.
doi:10.1111/j.1747-9991.2006.00035.x


–––, 2006b, “The Nature of
Testimony”, 
Pacific Philosophical Quarterly
, 87(2):
177–197. doi:10.1111/j.1468-0114.2006.00254.x


–––, 2008, 
Learning from Words: Testimony as
a Source of Knowledge
, Oxford/New York: Oxford University Press.
doi:10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199219162.001.0001


–––, 2011, “Assertion and Isolated
Second‐Hand Knowledge”, in 
Assertion: New
Philosophical Essays
, Jessica Brown and Herman Cappelen (eds),
Oxford/New York: Oxford University Press, 251–276.


Lackey, Jennifer and Ernest Sosa (eds), 2006, 
The Epistemology
of Testimony
, Oxford: Clarendon Press.
doi:10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199276011.001.0001


Laetz, Brian, 2008, “A Modest Defense of Aesthetic
Testimony”, 
Journal of Aesthetics and Art Criticism
,
66(4): 355–363. doi:10.1111/j.1540-6245.2008.00316.x


Levinson, Jerrold, 2002, “Hume’s Standard of Taste:
The Real Problem”, 
Journal of Aesthetics and Art
Criticism
, 60(3): 227–238. doi:10.1111/1540-6245.00070


–––, 2005, “Aesthetic Properties
II”, 
Aristotelian Society Supplementary Volume
, 79(1):
211–227. doi:10.1111/j.0309-7013.2005.00133.x


–––, 2010, “Artistic Worth and Personal Taste”,

The Journal of Aesthetics and Art Criticism
, 68: 225–233


Livingston, Paisley, 2003, “On an Apparent Truism in
Aesthetics”, 
The British Journal of Aesthetics
, 43(3):
260–278. doi:10.1093/bjaesthetics/43.3.260


Locke, John, 1689, 
An Essay Concerning Human
Understanding
, London: Edward Mory.


Lopes, Dominic McIver, 2014, 
Beyond Art
, Oxford: Oxford
University Press. doi:10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199591558.001.0001


Lord, Errol, 2018, “How to Learn about Aesthetics and
Morality through Acquaintance and Deference”, in 
Oxford
Studies in Metaethics 13
, Russ Shafer-Landau (ed.), Oxford:
Oxford University Press, 71–97 (ch. 4).


Mackie, John L. 1997, 
Ethics: Inventing Right and Wrong
,
New York: Penguin Books


Matilal, Bimal Krishna and Arindam Chakrabarti (eds.), 1994,

Knowing from Words: Western and Indian Philosophical Analysis of
Understanding and Testimony
, (Synthese Library 230),
Dordrecht/Boston: Kluwer Academic. doi:10.1007/978-94-017-2018-2


McGonigal, Andrew, 2006, ‘The Autonomy of Aesthetic
Judgement’ 
British Journal of Aesthetics
, 46(4):
331–48.


McGrath, Sarah, 2009, “The Puzzle of Pure Moral
Deference”, 
Philosophical Perspectives
, 23(1):
321–344. doi:10.1111/j.1520-8583.2009.00174.x


–––, 2011, “Skepticism about Moral
Expertise as a Puzzle for Moral Realism”, 
Journal of
Philosophy
, 108(3): 111–137.
doi:10.5840/jphil201110837


McKinnon, Rachel, 2017, “How to Be an Optimist about
Aesthetic Testimony”, 
Episteme
, 14(2): 177–196.
doi:10.1017/epi.2016.4


McShane, Paddy Jane, 2018, “The Non-Remedial Value of
Dependence on Moral Testimony”, 
Philosophical Studies
,
175(3): 629–647. doi:10.1007/s11098-017-0885-6


Meskin, Aaron, 2004, “Aesthetic Testimony: What Can We Learn
from Others about Beauty and Art?”, 
Philosophy and
Phenomenological Research
, 69(1): 65–91.
doi:10.1111/j.1933-1592.2004.tb00384.x


–––, 2006, “Solving the Puzzle of
Aesthetic Testimony”, in 
Knowing Art: Essays in Aesthetics
and Epistemology
, Matthew Kieran and Dominic McIver Lopes (eds),
(Philosophical Studies Series 107), Dordrecht: Springer Netherlands,
109–124. doi:10.1007/978-1-4020-5265-1_8


Moran, Richard, 2018, 
The Exchange of Words: Speech,
Testimony, and Intersubjectivity
, New York: Oxford University
Press. doi:10.1093/oso/9780190873325.001.0001


Mothersill, Mary, 1961, “Critical Reasons”, 
The
Philosophical Quarterly
, 11(42): 74–78.
doi:10.2307/2216682


–––, 1994, 
Beauty
Restored
, Oxford: Oxford University Press.


Ninan, Dilip, 2014, “Taste Predicates and the Acquaintance
Inference”, 
Semantics and Linguistic Theory
, 24:
290–309. doi:10.3765/salt.v24i0.2413


Nguyen, C. Thi, 2017, “The Uses of Aesthetic
Testimony”, 
The British Journal of Aesthetics
, 57(1):
19–36. doi:10.1093/aesthj/ayw089


–––, 2020a, “Autonomy and Aesthetic
Engagement”, 
Mind
, 129(516): 1127–1156.
doi:10.1093/mind/fzz054


–––, 2020b, “Echo Chambers and Epistemic
Bubbles”, 
Episteme
, 17(2): 141–161.
doi:10.1017/epi.2018.32


Page, Jeremy, 2022, “Aesthetic Understanding”,

Estetika: The European Journal of Aesthetics
, LIX/XV(1):
48–68. doi:10.33134/eeja.269


Pettit, Philip, 1983, “The Possibility of Aesthetic
Realism”, in 
Pleasure, Preference, and Value: Studies in
Philosophical Aesthetics
, Eva Schaper (ed.), Cambridge/New York:
Cambridge University Press, 17–38.


Ranalli, Chris, 2020, “The Puzzle of Philosophical
Testimony”, 
European Journal of Philosophy
, 28(1):
142–163. doi:10.1111/ejop.12449


Ransom, Madeleine, 2019, “Frauds, Posers And Sheep: A Virtue
Theoretic Solution To The Acquaintance Debate”, 
Philosophy
and Phenomenological Research
, 98(2): 417–434.
doi:10.1111/phpr.12467


Reid, Thomas, 1764, 
An Inquiry into the Human Mind on the
Principles of Common Sense
, Edinburgh: A. Kincaid & J. Bell
and London: A. Millar.


Riggle, Nick, 2015, “On the Aesthetic Ideal”, 
The
British Journal of Aesthetics
, 55(4): 433–447.
doi:10.1093/aesthj/ayv026


–––, 2022, “Toward a Communitarian Theory
of Aesthetic Value”, 
The Journal of Aesthetics and Art
Criticism
, 80(1): 16–30. doi:10.1093/jaac/kpab060


Robson, Jon, 2012, “Aesthetic Testimony”,

Philosophy Compass
, 7(1): 1–10.
doi:10.1111/j.1747-9991.2011.00455.x


–––, 2014, “A Social Epistemology of
Aesthetics: Belief Polarization, Echo Chambers and Aesthetic
Judgement”, 
Synthese
, 191(11): 2513–2528.
doi:10.1007/s11229-014-0437-y


–––, 2015a, “Aesthetic Testimony and the
Norms of Belief Formation: Aesthetic Testimony and the Norms of Belief
Formation”, 
European Journal of Philosophy
, 23(3):
750–763. doi:10.1111/ejop.12007


–––, 2015b, “Norms of Belief and Norms of
Assertion in Aesthetics”, 
Philosopher’s Imprint
,
15: article 6.
 [
Robson 2015b available online
]


–––, 2017, “Against Aesthetic
Exceptionalism”, in 
Art and Belief
, Ema
Sullivan-Bissett, Helen Bradley, and Paul Noordhof (eds), Oxford:
Oxford University Press, 213–229 (ch. 12).


–––, 2018, “Is Perception the Canonical
Route to Aesthetic Judgment?”, 
Australasian Journal of
Philosophy
, 96(4): 657–668.
doi:10.1080/00048402.2017.1389964


–––, 2023, 
Aesthetic Testimony: an
Optimistic Approach
. Oxford: Oxford University Press.


Robson, Jon and Neil Sinclair, 2023, “Speculative Aesthetic
Expressivism”, 
British Journal of Aesthetics
, 63(2):
181–197. doi:10.1093/aesthj/ayac036


Scruton, Roger, 1974, 
Art and Imagination: A Study in the
Philosophy of Mind
, London: Methuen.


Shelley, James, 2023, “Aesthetic Acquaintance”,

Pacific Philosophical Quarterly
, 104(2): 392–407.
doi:10.1111/papq.12402


Sibley, Frank, 1959, “Aesthetic Concepts”, 
The
Philosophical Review
, 68(4): 421–450.
doi:10.2307/2182490


–––, 1965, “Aesthetic and
Nonaesthetic”, 
The Philosophical Review
, 74(2):
135–159. doi:10.2307/2183262


–––, 1968, “Objectivity and Aesthetics
I”, 
Aristotelian Society Supplementary Volume
, 42:
31–54. doi:10.1093/aristoteliansupp/42.1.31


–––,1974, “Particularity, Art and Evaluation”

Aristotelian Society Supplementary
, 48(1): 1–22.


Simion, Mona, Christoph Kelp, and Harmen Ghijsen, 2016,
“Norms of Belief”, 
Philosophical Issues
, 26(1):
374–392. doi:10.1111/phis.12077


Sinclair, Neil, 2006, “The Moral Belief Problem”,

Ratio
, 19(2): 249–260.
doi:10.1111/j.1467-9329.2006.00323.x


Sliwa, Paulina, 2012, “In Defense of Moral Testimony”,

Philosophical Studies
, 158(2): 175–195.
doi:10.1007/s11098-012-9887-6


Sosa, Ernest, 1991, 
Knowledge in Perspective: Selected Essays
in Epistemology
, Cambridge/New York: Cambridge University Press.
doi:10.1017/CBO9780511625299


Sweeney, Kevin W., 2007, “Can a Soup Be Beautiful? The Rise
of Gastronomy and the Aesthetics of Food”, in 
Food &
Philosophy: Eat, Drink, and Be Merry
, Fritz Allhoff and Dave
Monroe (eds.), Malden, MA: Blackwell, 117–132 (ch. 8).


Tanner, Michael, 2003, “Ethics and Aesthetics are —?”,
in 
Art and Morality
, Josè Luis Bermudez and Sebastian
Gardner (eds), New York: Routledge, 19–36.


Todd, Cain Samuel, 2004, “Quasi−Realism, Acquaintance,
and The Normative Claims of Aesthetic Judgement”, 
The
British Journal of Aesthetics
, 44(3): 277–296.
doi:10.1093/aesthj/44.3.277


Tormey, Alan, 1973, “Critical Judgments”,

Theoria
, 39(1–3): 35–49.
doi:10.1111/j.1755-2567.1973.tb00629.x


Wallbank, Rebecca, 2021, “Trust in Aesthetic
Testimony”, PhD thesis, Uppsala University.
 [
Wallbank 2021 available online
]


Wallbank, Rebecca and Andrew Reisner, 2020, “Trust,
Testimony, and Reasons for Belief”, in 
Epistemic Duties: New
Arguments, New Angles
, Kevin McCain and Scott Stapleford (eds.),
New York: Routledge, 239–253 (ch. 15).


Wallbank, Rebecca and Jon Robson, 2022, “Over-Appreciating
Appreciation”, in 
Perspectives on Taste: Aesthetics,
Language, Metaphysics, and Experimental Philosophy
, Jeremy Wyatt,
Julia Zakkou, and Dan Zeman (eds.), New York: Routledge, chapter
3.


Weinberg, Jonathan M., 2007, “How to Challenge Intuitions
Empirically Without Risking Skepticism”, 
Midwest Studies in
Philosophy
, 31(1): 318–343.
doi:10.1111/j.1475-4975.2007.00157.x


Whiting, Daniel, 2015, “The Glass Is Half Empty: A New
Argument for Pessimism about Aesthetic Testimony”, 
The
British Journal of Aesthetics
, 55(1): 91–107.
doi:10.1093/aesthj/ayu099


Wollheim, Richard, 1980, 
Art and Its Objects
, second
edition, (Cambridge Philosophy Classics), Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press. doi:10.1017/CBO9781316286777


Wright, Stephen, 2019, 
Knowledge Transmission
, New York:
Routledge. doi:10.4324/9781315111384


Young, James O., 2009, “Relativism, Standards and Aesthetic
Judgements”, 
International Journal of Philosophical
Studies
, 17(2): 221–231. doi:10.1080/09672550902794439


Zangwill, Nick, 1990, “Two Dogmas of Kantian
Aesthetics”, 
Proceedings of XIth International Congress in
Aesthetics, 1988
, Richard Woodfield (ed.), Nottingham: Nottingham
Polytechnic Press, 233–238.








Academic Tools










How to cite this entry
.








Preview the PDF version of this entry
 at the
 
Friends of the SEP Society
.








Look up topics and thinkers related to this entry

 at the Internet Philosophy Ontology Project (InPhO).








Enhanced bibliography for this entry

at 
PhilPapers
, with links to its database.












Other Internet Resources



[Please contact the author with suggestions.]






Related Entries




aesthetic, concept of the
 |
 
aesthetics: aesthetic judgment
 |
 
testimony: epistemological problems of










 






Copyright © 2024
 by




Jon Robson

<
jonvrobson
@
gmail
.
com
>

Rebecca Wallbank
<
rebecca
.
wallbank
@
filosofi
.
uu
.
se
>
    




 









  Open access to the SEP is made possible by a world-wide funding initiative.

  Please Read How You Can Help Support the Growth and Development of the Encyclopedia




 

