











 
 Entry Navigation 






Entry Contents


Bibliography


Academic Tools


Friends PDF Preview 


Author and Citation Info 
 


Back to Top 


























Hannah Arendt
First published Thu Jul 27, 2006; substantive revision Mon Feb 12, 2024





Hannah Arendt (1906–1975) was one of the most influential
political philosophers of the twentieth century. Born into a
German-Jewish family, she was forced to leave Germany in 1933 and
lived in Paris for the next eight years, working for a number of
Jewish refugee organizations. In 1941 she immigrated to the United
States and soon became part of a lively intellectual circle in New
York. She held a number of academic positions at various American
universities until her death in 1975. She is best known for three
works that had a major impact both within and outside the academic
community. The first, 
The Origins of Totalitarianism
,
published in 1951, was a study of the Nazi and Stalinist regimes that
generated a wide-ranging debate on the nature and historical
antecedents of the totalitarian phenomenon. The second, 
The Human
Condition
, published in 1958, was an original philosophical study
that investigated the fundamental categories of the 
vita
activa
 (labor, work, action). The third, 
Eichmann in
Jerusalem
, reported on the trial of a major Nazi perpetrator and
coined the controversial term “banality of evil”. In
addition to these important works, Arendt published a number of
influential essays on topics such as the nature of revolution,
freedom, authority, tradition and the modern age. At the time of her
death in 1975, she had completed the first two volumes of her last
major philosophical work, 
The Life of the Mind
, which
examined the three fundamental faculties of the 
vita
contemplativa
 (thinking, willing, judging).








1. Biographical Sketch


2. Introduction


3. Arendt’s Concept of Totalitarianism


4. The Human Condition




4.1 Arendt’s Conception of Modernity


4.2 The 
Vita Activa
: Labor, Work and Action


4.3 Freedom, Natality and Plurality


4.4 Action, Narrative, and Remembrance


4.5 Action and the Space of Appearance


4.6 Action and Power


4.7 The Unpredictability and Irreversibility of Action




5. Arendt’s Conception of Citizenship




5.1 Citizenship and the Public Sphere


5.2 Citizenship, Agency, and Collective Identity




6. The Life of the Mind and its Moral Significance




6.1 
Eichmann in Jerusalem
: Arendt’s Reconceptualization of Evil 


6.2 The Moral Significance of Thinking and Judgment


6.3 Self-Consciousness, Social Pressure and Autonomy 


6.4 Judgment and Politics: Two Models


6.5 Opinion and Truth in Politics 




Bibliography




Works by Arendt


Secondary Literature




Academic Tools


Other Internet Resources


Related Entries










1. Biographical Sketch



Hannah Arendt, one of the leading political thinkers of the twentieth
century, was born in 1906 in Hannover and died in New York in 1975. In
1924, after having completed her high school studies, she went to
Marburg University to study with Martin Heidegger. The encounter with
Heidegger, with whom she had a brief but intense love-affair, had a
lasting influence on her thought. After a year of study in Marburg,
she moved to Freiburg University where she spent one semester
attending the lectures of Edmund Husserl. In the spring of 1926 she
went to Heidelberg University to study with Karl Jaspers, a
philosopher with whom she established a long-lasting intellectual and
personal friendship. She completed her doctoral dissertation, entitled

Der Liebesbegriff bei Augustin
 (hereafter LA) under
Jaspers’s supervision in 1929. She was forced to flee Germany in
1933 as a result of Hitler’s rise to power, and after a brief
stay in Prague and Geneva she moved to Paris where for six years
(1933–39) she worked for a number of Jewish refugee
organisations. In 1936 she separated from her first husband,
Günther Stern, and started to live with Heinrich Blücher,
whom she married in 1940. During her stay in Paris she continued to
work on her biography of 
Rahel Varnhagen
, which was not
published until 1957 (hereafter RV). In 1941 she was forced to leave
France and moved to New York with her husband and mother. In New York
she soon became part of an influential circle of writers and
intellectuals gathered around the journal 
Partisan Review
.
During the post-war period she lectured at a number of American
universities, including Princeton, Berkeley and Chicago, but was most
closely associated with the New School for Social Research, where she
was a professor of political philosophy until her death in 1975. In
1951 she published 
The Origins of Totalitarianism
 (hereafter
OT), a major study of the Nazi and Stalinist regimes that soon became
a classic, followed by 
The Human Condition
 in 1958 (hereafter
HC), her most important philosophical work. In 1961 she attended the
trial of Adolf Eichmann in Jerusalem as a reporter for 
The New
Yorker
 magazine, and two years later published 
Eichmann in
Jerusalem
 (hereafter EJ), which caused a deep controversy in
Jewish circles. The same year saw the publication of 
On
Revolution
 (hereafter OR), a comparative analysis of the American
and French revolutions. A number of important essays were also
published during the 1960s and early 1970s: a first collection was
entitled 
Between Past and Future
 (hereafter BPF), a second

Men in Dark Times
 (hereafter MDT), and a third 
Crises of
the Republic
 (hereafter CR). At the time of her death in 1975,
she had completed the first two volumes on 
Thinking
 and

Willing
 of her last major philosophical work, 
The Life of
the Mind
, which was published posthumously in 1978 (hereafter
LM). The third volume, on 
Judging
, was left unfinished, but
some background material and lecture notes were published in 1982
under the title 
Lectures on Kant’s Political Philosophy

(hereafter LKPP).


2. Introduction



Hannah Arendt was one of the seminal political thinkers of the
twentieth century. From the very beginning, her interest was not in
the human being in the singular, but in human beings in the plural and
in the conditions and forms of their shared lives. Even though Arendt
only became politically interested after her dissertation, in this
first work she already asks about the conditions of the possibility of
a human community (Stark/Scott 1996, 116). By analyzing the
Augustinian concept of love, she criticizes the worldlessness of the
philosophical tradition (LA, 112). The question of how the world can
be transformed from a natural 
kosmos
, in which people are
initially strangers, into a 
polis
 shared by all, has pervaded
Arendt’s writings since her dissertation. Thus,
the 
leitmotif
 of her work is the question of how people can
live together in a common world (Tömmel 2013).



The power and originality of her thinking is evident in works such as

The Origins of Totalitarianism
, 
The Human Condition

and 
The Life of the Mind
. In these books and numerous essays
she grappled with the most crucial political events of her time,
trying to grasp their meaning and historical import, and showing how
they affected our categories of moral and political judgment. In her
political writings, and especially in 
The Origins of
Totalitarianism
, Arendt claimed that the phenomenon of
totalitarianism has broken the continuity of Occidental history, and
has rendered meaningless most of our moral and political categories.
Faced with the events of the Holocaust and the Gulag, we can no longer
go back to traditional concepts and values, so as to explain the
unprecedented by means of precedents, or to understand the monstrous
by means of the familiar. The burden of our time must be faced without
the aid of tradition, or as Arendt once put it, “without a
bannister” (RPW, 336). What was required, in her view, was a

new framework
 that could enable us to come to terms with the
twin horrors of the twentieth century, Nazism and Stalinism. She
provided such framework in her book on totalitarianism, and went on to
develop a new set of philosophical categories that could illuminate
the human condition and provide a fresh perspective on the nature of
political life.



The assumption that the thread of tradition is irrevocably broken
influenced Arendt’s 
method
: The hermeneutic
strategy she employed to re-establish a link with the past is indebted
to both Walter Benjamin and Martin Heidegger. From Benjamin she took
the idea of a fragmentary historiography, one that seeks to identify
the moments of rupture, displacement and dislocation in history. Such
fragmentary historiography enables one to recover the lost potentials
of the past in the hope that they may find actualization in the
present. From Heidegger she took the idea of a deconstructive reading
of the Western philosophical tradition, one that seeks to uncover the
original meaning of our categories and to liberate them from the
distorting incrustations of tradition. Such deconstructive
hermeneutics enables one to recover those primordial experiences
(
Urphänomene
) which have been occluded or forgotten by
the philosophical tradition, and thereby to recover the lost origins
of our philosophical concepts and categories.



By relying on these two hermeneutic strategies Arendt hopes to redeem
from the past its lost or “forgotten treasure,” that is,
those fragments from the past that might still be of significance to
us. In her view it is no longer possible, after the collapse of
tradition, to save the past as a whole; the task, rather, is to redeem
from oblivion those elements of the past that are still able to
illuminate our situation. Only by means of this critical
reappropriation can we discover the past anew, endow it with relevance
and meaning for the present, and make it a source of inspiration for
the future. The breakdown of tradition may in fact provide the great
chance to look upon the past “with eyes undistorted by any
tradition, with a directness which has disappeared from Occidental
reading and hearing ever since Roman civilization submitted to the
authority of Greek thought” (BPF, 28–9). Arendt’s
return to the original experience of the Greek 
polis

represents, in this sense, an attempt to break the fetters of a
worn-out tradition and to rediscover a past over which tradition has
no longer a claim.



How can Arendt’s philosophy be 
classified
? Although
some of Arendt’s works now belong to the classics of the Western
tradition of political thought, she has always remained difficult to
classify. Her political philosophy cannot be characterized in terms of
the traditional categories of conservatism, liberalism, and socialism.
Nor can her thinking be assimilated to the recent revival of
communitarian political thought, to be found, for example, in the
writings of A. MacIntyre, M. Sandel, C. Taylor and M. Walzer. Her name
has been invoked by a number of critics of the liberal tradition, on
the grounds that she presented a vision of politics that stood in
opposition some key liberal principles. There are many strands of
Arendt’s thought that could justify such a claim, in particular,
her critique of representative democracy, her stress on civic
engagement and political deliberation, her separation of morality from
politics, and her praise of the revolutionary tradition. However, it
would be a mistake to view Arendt as an anti-liberal thinker. Arendt
was in fact a stern defender of constitutionalism and the rule of law,
an advocate of fundamental human rights (among which she included not
only the right to life, liberty, and freedom of expression, but also
the right to action and to opinion), and a critic of all forms of
political community based on traditional ties and customs, as well as
those based on religious, ethnic, or racial identity.



Arendt’s political thought cannot, in this sense, be identified
either with the liberal tradition or with the claims advanced by a
number of its critics. Arendt did not conceive of politics as a means
for the satisfaction of individual preferences, nor as a way to
integrate individuals around a shared conception of the good. Her
conception of politics is based instead on the idea of active
citizenship, that is, on the value and importance of civic engagement
and collective deliberation about all matters affecting the political
community. If there is a tradition of thought with which Arendt can be
identified, it is the classical tradition of civic republicanism
originating in Aristotle and embodied in the writings of Machiavelli,
Montesquieu, Jefferson, and Tocqueville. According to this tradition
politics finds its authentic expression whenever citizens gather
together in a public space to deliberate and decide about matters of
collective concern. Political activity is valued not because it may
lead to agreement or to a shared conception of the good, but because
it enables each citizen to exercise his or her powers of agency, to
develop the capacities for judgment and to attain by concerted action
some measure of political efficacy.



In what follows, we reconstruct Arendt’s philosophy along five
major themes: (1) her concept of totalitarianism, (2) her conception
of modernity, (3) her theory of action, (4) her conception of
citizenship, (5) her theory of thinking and judgment and how it
concerns the problems of evil and autonomy.


3. Arendt’s Concept of Totalitarianism



The 
Origins of Totalitarianism
, first published in
1951, established Hannah Arendt’s reputation as a political
thinker. In it, Arendt examines the historical development and the
shared political characteristics of National Socialism and Stalinism.
Faced with the horrors of the extermination camps and what is now
termed the Gulag, Arendt strove to understand these phenomena in their
own terms, neither deducing them from precedents nor placing them in
some overarching scheme of historical necessity. The work is one of
the earliest standard works of totalitarianism research.



The book contains three volumes in one: Antisemitism, Imperialism, and
Totalitarianism. In the first part, she traces the development of
anti-Semitism in the 18th and 19th century. The second part covers the
emergence of racism and imperialism in the 19th and 20th century up to
National Socialism. Here she argues that imperialism prepared the
ground for totalitarianism and provided the preconditions and
precedents for its perpetrators (cf. Canovan 2000, 30). The third part
is devoted to the two historical manifestations of total domination.
In analyzing antisemitism, imperialism, and racism, Arendt did not
want to provide a 
causal
 explanation for totalitarianism, but
rather a historical investigation of the 
elements
 that
“crystallized into totalitarianism” (Canovan 2000,
27).



What does Arendt understand by the term? Emphasizing its
“horrible originality” (UP in EU, 309), Arendt understood
totalitarianism to be an entirely new political phenomenon that
differed “essentially from other forms of political oppression
known to us such as despotism, tyranny and dictatorship” (OT,
460) and thus broke with all political and legal tradition. In the 14
chapters of the third part, Arendt analyzes the conditions and
features of this “novel form of government” (OT, 460).
According to her, important factors that made totalitarianism possible
included collapsed political structures and masses of uprooted people
who had lost their orientation and sense of reality in a world marked
by socio-economic transformation, revolution and war. While the
leaders of the movements belonged to the “mob” (OT, 326),
their many supporters were recruited from these rootless and lonely
“masses” (OT, 311) through propaganda (OT, 341):
“The ideal subject of totalitarian rule is not the convinced
Nazi or the convinced Communist, but people for whom the distinction
between fact and fiction (i.e., the reality of experience) and the
distinction between true and false (i.e., the standards of thought) no
longer exist.” (OT, 474).



Thus, totalitarianism is based on a secular, pseudo-scientific
ideology that reduces the complexity of reality to the logic of one
idea pretending to be able to explain everything. In its
self-understanding, the movement is merely carrying out the the
alleged laws of nature or history outlined by the ideology. It is
quintessential, however, that this “central fiction” a
totalitarian system rests upon, is translated into a
“functioning reality” (OT, 364) by a “completely
new” form of “totalitarian organization” (OT, 364):
Characteristically, the state is not a monolithic, strictly ordered
system, but has a deliberately chaotic, fluid and shapeless structure
with competing institutions and a “fluctuating hierarchy”
(OT, 369), which makes predictability, trust and accountability
impossible. Above this “maze”, however, “lies the
power nucleus of the country, the superefficient and supercompetent
services of the secret police” (OT, 420). Thus, the organization
combines deliberate chaos with the “iron band” (OT, 466)
of total control through extreme coercion and terror.



While the regime openly claims unlimited power and aims at world
domination, their “real secret” (OT, 436) are the
concentration and extermination camps as their “true central
institution” (OT, 438). According to Arendt, the camps
“serve as laboratories in which the fundamental belief of
totalitarianism that everything is possible is being verified.”
(OT, 437). The total terror in the camps is the “essence of
totalitarian government” (OT, 466), because here total
domination reaches its abysmal goal: To reduce “the infinite
plurality” of human beings into one interchangeable
“bundle of reactions” and thus eliminate
“spontaneity itself” (OT, 438). It seemed as if the real
mission of the totalitarian apparatus was to “to make men
superfluous” (OT, 445). Therefore, the “hurricane of
nihilism” (Canovan 2000, 30) unleashed by the totalitarian
regime cannot create an new world order, but ultimately leads to
nothing but unprecedented destruction: It even “bears the germ
of its own destruction.” (OT, 478).



What makes totalitarianism difficult to understand is not only the
gigantic scale of atrocities committed by it, but its senselessness.
Arendt maintained that totalitarianism defy common sense
understanding, because their crimes cannot be explained by
self-interested or utilitarian motives or ends (cf. OT, 440).The camps
did not serve evil, but useful purposes like forced labor or slavery,
but showed that an “absolute” (OT, viii-ix) and
“radical evil” is possible (OT, 443; cf. section 6).



Understanding totalitarianism despite this, is of the utmost political
importance, because insight into its structures and mode of operation
provides “the politically most important yardstick for judging
events in our time, namely: whether they serve totalitarian domination
or not.” (OT, 442)


4. The Human Condition



  Arendt’s analysis of totalitarianism “throws
into relief […] the political condition itself.” (Canovan
(2000, 35). In other words, it sheds light on the basic conditions of
politics, Arendt turned to in her major philosophical work, 
The
Human Condition
. Published in 1958, the book contains her
critical conception of the modern age, the tripartite division of the

vita activa
 in labor, work and action, and thus
Arendt’s political theory, which examines the basic conditions
of political agency.



Arendt’s theory of action and her revival of the ancient notion
of 
praxis
 represent one of the most original contributions to
twentieth century political thought. By distinguishing action
(
praxis
) from fabrication (
poiesis
), by linking it
to freedom and plurality, and by showing its connection to speech and
remembrance, Arendt is able to articulate a conception of politics in
which questions of meaning and identity can be addressed in a fresh
and original manner. Moreover, by viewing action as a mode of human
togetherness, Arendt is able to develop a conception of participatory
democracy which stands in direct contrast to the bureaucratized and
elitist forms of politics so characteristic of the modern epoch.


4.1 Arendt’s Conception of Modernity



Shaped by her experience of totalitarianism in the twentieth century,
Arendt articulated a fairly negative conception of modernity in

The Human Condition
, and in some of the essays collected in

Between Past and Future
.  In these writings Arendt is
primarily concerned with the losses incurred as a result of the
eclipse of tradition, religion, and authority, but she offers a number
of illuminating suggestions with respect to the resources that the
modern age can still provide to address questions of meaning,
identity, and value.



For Arendt modernity is characterized by the 
loss of the
world
, by which she means the restriction or elimination of the
public sphere of action and speech in favor of the private world of
introspection and the private pursuit of economic interests. Modernity
is the age of mass society, of the rise of the 
social
 out of
a previous distinction between the public and the private, and of the
victory of 
animal laborans
 over 
homo faber
 and the
classical conception of man as 
zoon politikon
. Modernity is
the age of bureaucratic administration and anonymous labor, rather
than politics and action, of elite domination and the manipulation of
public opinion. It is the age when totalitarian forms of government,
such as Nazism and Stalinism, have emerged as a result of the
institutionalization of terror and violence. It is the age where
history as a “natural process” has replaced history as a
fabric of actions and events, where homogeneity and conformity have
replaced plurality and freedom, and where isolation and loneliness
have eroded human solidarity and all spontaneous forms of living
together. Modernity is the age where the past no longer carries any
certainty of evaluation, where individuals, having lost their
traditional standards and values, must search for new grounds of human
community as such.



Arendt articulates her conception of modernity around a number of key
features: these are world alienation, earth alienation, the rise of
the social, and the victory of 
animal laborans
. World
alienation refers to the loss of an intersubjectively constituted
world of experience and action by means of which we establish our
self-identity and an adequate sense of reality. Earth alienation
refers to the attempt to escape from the confines of the earth;
spurred by modern science and technology, we have searched for ways to
overcome our earth-bound condition by setting out on the exploration
of space, by attempting to recreate life under laboratory conditions,
and by trying to extend our given life-span. The rise of the social
refers to the expansion of the market economy from the early modern
period and the ever increasing accumulation of capital and social
wealth. With the rise of the social everything has become an object of
production and consumption, of acquisition and exchange; moreover, its
constant expansion has resulted in the blurring of the distinction
between the private and the public. The victory of animal laborans
refers to the triumph of the values of labor over those of homo faber
and of man as zoon politikon. All the values characteristic of the
world of fabrication — permanence, stability, durability —
as well as those characteristic of the world of action and speech
— freedom, plurality, solidarity — are sacrificed in favor
of the values of life, productivity and abundance.



Arendt’s interpretation of modernity can be criticized on a
number of grounds. We focus here on her assessment of the social:
Arendt identifies the social with all those activities formerly
restricted to the private sphere of the household and having to do
with the necessities of life. Her claim is that, with the tremendous
expansion of the economy from the end of the eighteenth century, all
such activities have taken over the public realm and transformed it
into a sphere for the satisfaction of our material needs. Society has
thus invaded and conquered the public realm, turning it into a
function of what previously were private needs and concerns, and has
thereby destroyed the boundary separating the public and the private.
Arendt also claims that with the expansion of the social realm the
tripartite division of human activities has been undermined to the
point of becoming meaningless. In her view, once the social realm has
established its monopoly, the distinction between labor, work and
action is lost, since every effort is now expended on reproducing our
material conditions of existence. Obsessed with life, productivity,
and consumption, we have turned into a society of laborers and
jobholders who no longer appreciate the values associated with work,
nor those associated with action.



From this brief account it is clear that Arendt’s concept of the
social plays a crucial role in her assessment of modernity. However
some have argued that this may have led her to a series of
questionable judgments:




In the first place, Arendt’s characterization of the social
is overly restricted. She claims that the social is the realm of
labor, of biological and material necessity, of the reproduction of
our condition of existence. She also claims that the rise of the
social coincides with the expansion of the economy from the end of the
eighteenth century. However, having identified the social with the
growth of the economy in the past two centuries, Arendt cannot
characterize it in terms of a subsistence model of simple
reproduction. (See Benhabib 2003, Ch. 6; Bernstein 1986, Ch. 9; Hansen
1993, Ch. 3; Parekh 1981, Ch. 8.)


Secondly, Arendt’s identification of the social with the
activities of the household is responsible for a major shortcoming in
her analysis of the economy. She is, in fact, unable to acknowledge
that a modern capitalist economy constitutes a structure of power with
a highly asymmetric distribution of costs and rewards. By relying on
the misleading analogy of the household, she maintains that all
questions pertaining to the economy are pre-political, and thus
ignores the crucial question of economic power and exploitation. (See
Bernstein 1986, Ch. 9; Hansen 1993, Ch. 3; Parekh 1981, Ch. 8; Pitkin
1998; Pitkin 1994, Ch. 10, Hinchman and Hinchman; Wolin 1994, Ch. 11,
Hinchman and Hinchman.)


Finally, by insisting on a strict separation between the private
and the public, and between the social and the political, she is
unable to account for the essential connection between these spheres
and the struggles to redraw their boundaries. Today many so-called
private issues have become public concerns, and the struggle for
justice and equal rights has extended into many spheres. By insulating
the political sphere from the concerns of the social, and by
maintaining a strict distinction between the public and the private,
Arendt is unable to account for some of the most important
achievements of modernity — the extension of justice and equal
rights, and the redrawing of the boundaries between the public and the
private. (See Benhabib 2003, Ch. 6; Bernstein 1986, Ch. 9; Dietz 2002,
Ch. 5; Pitkin 1998; Pitkin 1995, Ch. 3, Honig; Zaretsky 1997, Ch. 8,
Calhoun and McGowan.)




4.2 The 
Vita Activa
: Labor, Work and Action



Arendt analyzes the 
vita activa
 via three categories which
correspond to the three fundamental activities of our
being-in-the-world: labor, work, and action. Labor is the activity
which is tied to the human condition of life, work the activity which
is tied to the condition of worldliness, and action the activity tied
to the condition of plurality. For Arendt each activity is autonomous,
in the sense of having its own distinctive principles and of being
judged by different criteria. Labor is judged by its ability to
sustain human life, to cater to our biological needs of consumption
and reproduction, work is judged by its ability to build and maintain
a world fit for human use, and action is judged by its ability to
disclose the identity of the agent, to affirm the reality of the
world, and to actualize our capacity for freedom. Although Arendt
considers the three activities of labor, work and action equally
necessary to a complete human life, in the sense that each contributes
in its distinctive way to the realization of our human capacities, it
is clear from her writings that she takes action to be the

differentia specifica
 of human beings, that which
distinguishes them from both the life of animals (who are similar to
us insofar as they need to labor to sustain and reproduce themselves)
and the life of the gods (with whom we share, intermittently, the
activity of contemplation). In this respect the categories of labor
and work, while significant in themselves, must be seen as
counterpoints to the category of action, helping to differentiate and
highlight the place of action within the order of the 
vita
activa
.



In 
The Human Condition
 Arendt stresses repeatedly that action
is primarily symbolic in character and that the web of human
relationships is sustained by communicative interaction (HC,
178–9, 184–6, 199–200). Thus, action entails speech:
by means of language we are able to articulate the meaning of our
actions and to coordinate the actions of a plurality of agents.
Conversely, speech entails action, not only in the sense that speech
itself is a form of action, or that most acts are performed in the
manner of speech, but in the sense that action is often the means
whereby we check the sincerity of the speaker. Thus, just as action
without speech runs the risk of being meaningless and would be
impossible to coordinate with the actions of others, so speech without
action would lack one of the means by which we may confirm the
veracity of the speaker. As we shall see, this link between action and
speech is central to Arendt’s characterization of power, that
potential which springs up between people when they act “in
concert,” and which is actualized “only where word and
deed have not parted company, where words are not empty and deeds not
brutal, where words are not used to veil intentions but to disclose
realities, and deeds are not used to violate and destroy but to
establish relations and create new realities ” (HC, 200).



For Arendt, action constitutes the highest realization of the 
vita
activa
. In the opening section of the chapter on action in

The Human Condition
 Arendt discusses one of its central
functions, namely, the disclosure of the identity of the agent. In
action and speech, she maintains, individuals reveal themselves as the
unique individuals they are, disclose to the world their distinct
personalities. In terms of Arendt’s distinction, they reveal
“who” they are as distinct to “what” they are
— the latter referring to individual abilities and talents, as
well as deficiencies and shortcomings, which are traits all human
beings share. Neither labor nor work enable individuals to disclose
their identities, to reveal “who” they are as distinct
from “what” they are. In labor the individuality of each
person is submerged by being bound to a chain of natural necessities,
to the constraints imposed by biological survival. When we engage in
labor we can only show our sameness, the fact that we all belong to
the human species and must attend to the needs of our bodies. In this
sphere we do indeed “behave,” “perform roles,”
and “fulfill functions,” since we all obey the same
imperatives. In work there is more scope for individuality, in that
each work of art or production bears the mark of its maker; but the
maker is still subordinate to the end product, both in the sense of
being guided by a model, and in the sense that the product will
generally outlast the maker. Moreover, the end product reveals little
about the maker except the fact that he or she was able to make it. It
does not tell us who the creator was, only that he or she had certain
abilities and talents. It is thus only in action and speech, in
interacting with others through words and deeds, that individuals
reveal who they personally are and can affirm their unique identities.
Action and speech are in this sense very closely related because both
contain the answer to the question asked of every newcomer: “Who
are you?” This disclosure of the “who” is made
possible by both deeds and words, but of the two it is speech that has
the closest affinity to revelation. Without the accompaniment of
speech, action would lose its revelatory quality and could no longer
be identified with an agent. It would lack, as it were, the conditions
of ascription of agency.


4.3 Freedom, Natality and Plurality



The two central features of action are 
freedom
 and

plurality
. By freedom Arendt does not mean the
ability to choose among a set of possible alternatives, but
spontaneity, i.e. the capacity to begin, to start something new, to do
the unexpected, with which all human beings are endowed by virtue of
being born. Action as the realization of freedom is therefore rooted
in 
natality
, in the fact that each birth represents a
new beginning and the introduction of novelty in the world. “It
is in the nature of beginning” — she claims —
“that something new is started which cannot be expected from
whatever may have happened before. This character of startling
unexpectedness is inherent in all beginnings … The fact that
man is capable of action means that the unexpected can be expected
from him, that he is able to perform what is infinitely improbable.
And this again is possible only because each man is unique, so that
with each birth something uniquely new comes into the world ”
(HC, 177–8). To act means to be able to do the unanticipated;
and it is entirely in keeping with this conception that most of the
concrete examples of action in the modern age that Arendt discusses
are cases of revolutions and popular uprisings. Her claim is that
“revolutions are the only political events which confront us
directly and inevitably with the problem of beginning,” (OR, 21)
since they represent the attempt to found a new political space, a
space where freedom can appear as a worldly reality. The favorite
example for Arendt is the American Revolution, because there the act
of foundation took the form of a constitution of liberty. Her other
examples are the revolutionary clubs of the French Revolution, the
Paris Commune of 1871, the creation of Soviets during the Russian
Revolution, the French Resistance to Hitler in the Second World War,
and the Hungarian revolt of 1956. In all these cases individual men
and women had the courage to interrupt their routine activities, to
step forward from their private lives in order to create a public
space where freedom could appear, and to act in such a way that the
memory of their deeds could become a source of inspiration for the
future.




Plurality
, to which we may now turn, is the other
central feature of action. For Arendt, plurality is the necessary
condition of all political life (HC, 7). For if to act means to take
the initiative, to introduce the novum and the unexpected into the
world, it also means that it is not something that can be done in
isolation from others, that is, independently of the presence of a
plurality of actors who from their different perspectives can judge
the quality of what is being enacted. In this respect action needs
plurality in the same way that performance artists need an audience;
without the presence and acknowledgment of others, action would cease
to be a meaningful activity. Action, to the extent that it requires
appearing in public, making oneself known through words and deeds, and
eliciting the consent of others, can only exist in a context defined
by plurality.



Arendt establishes the connection between action and plurality by
means of an anthropological argument. In her view just as life is the
condition that corresponds to the activity of labor and worldliness
the condition that corresponds to the activity of work, so plurality
is the condition that corresponds to action. She defines plurality as
“the fact that men, not Man, live on the earth and inhabit the
world,” and says that it is the condition of human action
“because we are all the same, that is, human, in such a way that
nobody is ever the same as anyone else who ever lived, lives, or will
live ” (HC, 7–8). Plurality thus refers both to equality
and distinction, to the fact that all human beings belong to the same
species and are sufficiently alike to understand one another, but yet
no two of them are ever interchangeable, since each of them is an
individual endowed with a unique biography and perspective on the
world. It is by virtue of plurality that each of us is capable of
acting and relating to others in ways that are unique and distinctive,
and in so doing of contributing to a network of actions and
relationships that is infinitely complex and unpredictable.


4.4 Action, Narrative, and Remembrance



One of the principal drawbacks of action, Arendt maintains, is to be
extremely fragile, to be subject to the erosion of time and to
forgetfulness; unlike the products of the activity of work, which
acquire a measure of permanence by virtue of their sheer facticity,
deeds and words do not survive their enactment unless they are
remembered. Remembrance alone, the retelling of deeds as stories, can
save the lives and deeds of actors from oblivion and futility. And it
is precisely for this reason, Arendt points out, that the Greeks
valued poetry and history so highly, because they rescued the glorious
(as well as the less glorious) deeds of the past for the benefit of
future generations (HC, 192 ff; BPF, 63–75). Through their
narratives the fragility and perishability of human action was
overcome and made to outlast the lives of their doers and the limited
life-span of their contemporaries. They preserve the memory of deeds
through time, and in so doing, they enable these deeds to become
sources of inspiration for the future, that is, models to be imitated,
and, if possible, surpassed.



The function of the storyteller is thus crucial not only for the
preservation of the doings and sayings of actors, but also for the
full disclosure of the identity of the actor. The narratives of a
storyteller, Arendt claims, “tell us more about their subjects,
the ‘hero’ in the center of each story, than any product
of human hands ever tells us about the master who produced it”
(HC, 184). Indeed, it is one of Arendt’s most important claims
that the meaning of action itself is dependent upon the articulation
retrospectively given to it by historians and narrators. Narratives
can thus provide a measure of truthfulness and a greater degree of
significance to the actions of individuals.



However, to be preserved, such narratives needed in turn an audience,
that is, a community of hearers who became the transmitters of the
deeds that had been immortalized. As Sheldon Wolin has aptly put it,
“audience is a metaphor for the political community whose nature
is to be a community of remembrance” (Wolin 1977, 97). In other
words, behind the actor stands the storyteller, but behind the
storyteller stands a 
community of memory
. It was one of the
primary functions of the Greek 
polis
 to be precisely such a
community, to preserve the words and deeds of its citizens from
oblivion and the ravages of time, and thereby to leave a testament for
future generations.


4.5 Action and the Space of Appearance



For Arendt the 
polis
 stands for the 
space of
appearance
, for that space “where I appear to others as
others appear to me, where men exist not merely like other living or
inanimate things, but to make their appearance explicitly.” Such
public space of appearance can be always recreated anew wherever
individuals gather together politically, that is, “wherever men
are together in the manner of speech and action” (HC,
198–9). However, since it is a creation of action, this space of
appearance is highly fragile and exists only when actualized through
the performance of deeds or the utterance of words. The space of
appearance must be continually recreated by action; its existence is
secured whenever actors gather together for the purpose of discussing
and deliberating about matters of public concern, and it disappears
the moment these activities cease. It is always a potential space that
finds its actualization in the actions and speeches of individuals who
have come together to undertake some common project. It may arise
suddenly, as in the case of revolutions, or it may develop slowly out
of the efforts to change some specific piece of legislation or policy.
Historically, it has been recreated whenever public spaces of action
and deliberation have been set up, from town hall meetings to
workers’ councils, from demonstrations and sit-ins to struggles
for justice and equal rights.


4.6 Action and Power



The capacity to act in concert for a public-political purpose is what
Arendt calls power. Power needs to be distinguished from strength,
force, and violence (CR, 143–55). Unlike strength, it is not the
property of an individual, but of a plurality of actors joining
together for some common political purpose. Unlike force, it is not a
natural phenomenon but a human creation, the outcome of collective
engagement. And unlike violence, it is based not on coercion but on
consent and rational persuasion.



For Arendt, power is a 
sui generis
 phenomenon, since it is a
product of action and rests entirely on persuasion. It is a product of
action because it arises out of the concerted activities of a
plurality of agents, and it rests on persuasion because it consists in
the ability to secure the consent of others through unconstrained
discussion and debate. Its only limitation is the existence of other
people, but this limitation, she notes, “is not accidental,
because human power corresponds to the condition of plurality to begin
with” (HC, 201). It is actualized in all those cases where
action is undertaken for communicative (rather than strategic or
instrumental) purposes, and where speech is employed to disclose our
intentions and to articulate our motives to others.



Arendt maintains that the legitimacy of power is derived from the
initial getting together of people, that is, from the original pact of
association that establishes a political community, and is reaffirmed
whenever individuals act in concert through the medium of speech and
persuasion. For her “power needs no justification, being
inherent in the very existence of political communities; what it does
need is legitimacy … Power springs up whenever people get together
and act in concert, but it derives its legitimacy from the initial
getting together rather than from any action that then may
follow” (CR, 151).



Beyond appealing to the past, power also relies for its continued
legitimacy on the rationally binding commitments that arise out of a
process of free and undistorted communication. Because of this, power
is highly independent of material factors: it is sustained not by
economic, bureaucratic or military means, but by the power of common
convictions that result from a process of fair and unconstrained
deliberation.



Power is also not something that can be relied upon at all times or
accumulated and stored for future use. Rather, it exists only as a
potential which is actualized when actors gather together for
political action and public deliberation. It is thus closely connected
to the space of appearance, that public space which arises out of the
actions and speeches of individuals. Indeed, for Arendt, “power
is what keeps the public realm, the potential space of appearance
between acting and speaking men, in existence.” (HC, 200).



Power, then, lies at the basis of every political community and is the
expression of a potential that is always available to actors. It is
also the source of legitimacy of political and governmental
institutions, the means whereby they are transformed and adapted to
new circumstances and made to respond to the opinions and needs of the
citizens. “It is the people’s support that lends power to
the institutions of a country, and this support is but the
continuation of the consent that brought the laws into existence to
begin with … All political institutions are manifestations and
materializations of power; they petrify and decay as soon as the
living power of the people ceases to uphold them” (CR, 140).



The legitimacy of political institutions is dependent on the power,
that is, the active consent of the people; and insofar as governments
may be viewed as attempts to preserve power for future generations by
institutionalizing it, they require for their vitality the continuing
support and active involvement of all citizens.


4.7 The Unpredictability and Irreversibility of Action



In this section, we examine the 
unpredictability
 and

irreversibility
 of action, and their respective
remedies, the power of 
promise
 and the power to

forgive
. Action is unpredictable because it is a
manifestation of freedom, of the capacity to innovate and to alter
situations by engaging in them; but also, and primarily, because it
takes place within the web of human relationships, within a context
defined by plurality, so that no actor can control its final outcome.
Each actor sets off processes and enters into the inextricable web of
actions and events to which all other actors also contribute, with the
result that the outcome can never be predicted from the intentions of
any particular actor. The open and unpredictable nature of action is a
consequence of human freedom and plurality: by acting we are free to
start processes and bring about new events, but no actor has the power
to control the consequences of his or her deeds.



Another and related reason for the unpredictability of action is that
its consequences are boundless: every act sets in motion an unlimited
number of actions and reactions which have literally no end. As Arendt
puts it: “The reason why we are never able to foretell with
certainty the outcome and end of any action is simply that action has
no end” (HC, 233). This is because action “though it may
proceed from nowhere, so to speak, acts into a medium where every
action becomes a chain reaction and where every process is the cause
of new processes … the smallest act in the most limited
circumstances bears the seed of the same boundlessness, because one
deed, and sometimes one word, suffices to change every
constellation” (HC, 190).



Closely connected to the boundlessness and unpredictability of action
is its irreversibility. Every action sets off processes which cannot
be undone or retrieved in the way, say, we are able to undo a faulty
product of our hands. If one builds an artifact and is not satisfied
with it, it can always be destroyed and recreated again. This is
impossible where action is concerned, because action always takes
place within an already existing web of human relationships, where
every action becomes a reaction, every deed a source of future deeds,
and none of these can be stopped or subsequently undone. The
consequences of each act are thus not only unpredictable but also
irreversible; the processes started by action can neither be
controlled nor be reversed.



The remedy which the tradition of Western thought has proposed for the
unpredictability and irreversibility of action has consisted in
abstaining from action altogether, in the withdrawal from the sphere
of interaction with others, in the hope that one’s freedom and
integrity could thereby be preserved. Platonism, Stoicism and
Christianity elevated the sphere of contemplation above the sphere of
action, precisely because in the former one could be free from the
entanglements and frustrations of action. Arendt’s proposal, by
contrast, is not to turn one’s back on the realm of human
affairs, but to rely on two faculties inherent in action itself, the
faculty of 
forgiving
 and the faculty of

promising
. These two faculties are closely connected,
the former mitigating the irreversibility of action by absolving the
actor from the unintended consequences of his or her deeds, the latter
moderating the uncertainty of its outcome by binding actors to certain
courses of action and thereby setting some limit to the
unpredictability of the future. Both faculties are, in this respect,
connected to temporality: from the standpoint of the present forgiving
looks backward to what has happened and absolves the actor from what
was unintentionally done, while promising looks forward as it seeks to
establish islands of security in an otherwise uncertain and
unpredictable future. Forgiving enables us to come to terms with the
past and liberates us to some extent from the burden of
irreversibility; promising allows us to face the future and to set
some bounds to its unpredictability (HC, 237). Both faculties, in this
sense, depend on 
plurality
, on the presence and acting of
others, for no one can forgive himself and no one can feel bound by a
promise made only to one’s self. At the same time, both
faculties are an expression of human 
freedom
, since without
the faculty to undo what we have done in the past, and without the
ability to control at least partially the processes we have started,
we would be the victims “of an automatic necessity bearing all
the marks of inexorable laws” (HC, 246).


5. Arendt’s Conception of Citizenship



In this section, we reconstruct Arendt’s conception of
citizenship around two themes: (1) the public sphere, and (2)
political agency and collective identity, and to highlight the
contribution of Arendt’s conception to a theory of democratic
citizenship.


5.1 Citizenship and the Public Sphere



For Arendt the 
public sphere
 comprises two distinct
but interrelated dimensions. The first is the 
space of
appearance
, a space of political freedom and equality which comes
into being whenever citizens act in concert through the medium of
speech and persuasion. The second is the 
common world
, a
shared and public world of human artifacts, institutions and settings
which separates us from nature and which provides a relatively
permanent and durable context for our activities. Both dimensions are
essential to the practice of citizenship, the former providing the
spaces where it can flourish, the latter providing the stable
background from which public spaces of action and deliberation can
arise. For Arendt the reactivation of citizenship in the modern world
depends upon both the recovery of a common, shared world and the
creation of numerous spaces of appearance in which individuals can
disclose their identities and establish relations of reciprocity and
solidarity.



There are three features of the public sphere and of the sphere of
politics in general that are central to Arendt’s conception of
citizenship. These are, first, its 
artificial
 or constructed
quality; second, its 
spatial
 quality; and, third, the
distinction between 
public
 and 
private

interests.



As regards the first feature, Arendt always stressed the artificiality
of public life and of political activities in general, the fact that
they are man-made and constructed rather than natural or given. She
regarded this artificiality as something to be celebrated rather than
deplored. Politics for her was not the result of some natural
predisposition, or the realization of the inherent traits of human
nature. Rather, it was a cultural achievement of the first order,
enabling individuals to transcend the necessities of life and to
fashion a world within which free political action and discourse could
flourish.



The stress on the artificiality of politics has a number of important
consequences. For example, Arendt emphasized that the principle of
political equality does not rest on a theory of natural rights or on
some natural condition that precedes the constitution of the political
realm. Rather, it is an attribute of citizenship which individuals
acquire upon entering the public realm and which can be secured only
by democratic political institutions.



Another consequence of Arendt’s stress on the artificiality of
political life is evident in her rejection of all neo-romantic appeals
to the 
volk
 and to ethnic identity as the basis for political
community. She maintained that one’s ethnic, religious, or
racial identity was irrelevant to one’s identity as a citizen,
and that it should never be made the basis of membership in a
political community.



Arendt’s emphasis on the formal qualities of citizenship made
her position rather distant from those advocates of participation in
the 1960s who saw it in terms of recapturing a sense of intimacy, of
warmth and authenticity. For Arendt political participation was
important because it permitted the establishment of relations of
civility and solidarity among citizens. She claimed that the ties of
intimacy and warmth can never become political since they represent
psychological substitutes for the loss of the common world. The only
truly political ties are those of civic friendship and solidarity,
since they make political demands and preserve reference to the world.
For Arendt, therefore, the danger of trying to recapture the sense of
intimacy and warmth, of authenticity and communal feelings is that one
loses the public values of impartiality, civic friendship, and
solidarity.



The second feature stressed by Arendt has to do with the

spatial
 quality of public life, with the fact that political
activities are located in a public space where citizens are able to
meet one another, exchange their opinions and debate their
differences, and search for some collective solution to their
problems. Politics, for Arendt, is a matter of people sharing a common
world and a common space of appearance so that public concerns can
emerge and be articulated from different perspectives. In her view, it
is not enough to have a collection of private individuals voting
separately and anonymously according to their private opinions.
Rather, these individuals must be able to see and talk to one another
in public, to meet in a public-political space, so that their
differences as well as their commonalities can emerge and become the
subject of democratic debate.



This notion of a common public space helps us to understand how
political opinions can be formed which are neither reducible to
private, idiosyncratic preferences, on the one hand, nor to a
unanimous collective opinion, on the other. Arendt herself distrusted
the term “public opinion,” since it suggested the mindless
unanimity of mass society. In her view representative opinions could
arise only when citizens actually confronted one another in a public
space, so that they could examine an issue from a number of different
perspectives, modify their views, and enlarge their standpoint to
incorporate that of others. Political opinions, she claimed, can never
be formed in private; rather, they are formed, tested, and enlarged
only within a public context of argumentation and debate.



Another implication of Arendt’s stress on the spatial quality of
politics has to do with the question of how a collection of distinct
individuals can be united to form a political community. For Arendt
the unity that may be achieved in a political community is neither the
result of religious or ethnic affinity, not the expression of some
common value system. Rather, the unity in question can be attained by
sharing a public space and a set of political institutions, and
engaging in the practices and activities which are characteristic of
that space and those institutions.



A further implication of Arendt’s conception of the spatial
quality of politics is that since politics is a public activity, one
cannot be part of it without in some sense being present in a public
space. To be engaged in politics means actively participating in the
various public forums where the decisions affecting one’s
community are taken. Arendt’s insistence on the importance of
direct participation in politics is thus based on the idea that, since
politics is something that needs a worldly location and can only
happen in a public space, then if one is not present in such a space
one is simply not engaged in politics.



This public or world-centered conception of politics lies also at the
basis of the third feature stressed by Arendt, the distinction between

public
 and 
private
 interests. According to Arendt,
political activity is not a means to an end, but an end in itself; one
does not engage in political action to promote one’s welfare,
but to realize the principles intrinsic to political life, such as
freedom, equality, justice, and solidarity. In a late essay entitled
“Public Rights and Private Interests” (PRPI) Arendt
discusses the difference between one’s life as an individual and
one’s life as a citizen, between the life spent on one’s
own and the life spent in common with others. She argues that our
public interest as citizens is quite distinct from our private
interest as individuals. The public interest is not the sum of private
interests, nor their highest common denominator, nor even the total of
enlightened self-interests. In fact, it has little to do with our
private interests, since it concerns the world that lies beyond the
self, that was there before our birth and that will be there after our
death, a world that finds embodiment in activities and institutions
with their own intrinsic purposes which might often be at odds with
our short-term and private interests. The public interest refers,
therefore, to the interests of a public world which we share as
citizens and which we can pursue and enjoy only by going beyond our
private self-interest.


5.2 Citizenship, Agency, and Collective Identity



Arendt’s participatory conception of citizenship provides the
best starting point for addressing both the question of the
constitution of 
collective identity
 and that concerning the
conditions for the exercise of effective 
political
agency
.



With respect to the first claim, it is important to note that one of
the crucial questions at stake in political discourse is the creation
of a collective identity, a “we” to which we can appeal
when faced with the problem of deciding among alternative courses of
action. Since in political discourse there is always disagreement
about the possible courses of action, the identity of the
“we” that is going to be created through a specific form
of action becomes a central question. By engaging in this or that
course of action we are, in fact, entering a claim on behalf of a
“we,” that is, we are creating a specific form of
collective identity. Political action and discourse are, in this
respect, essential to the constitution of collective identities.



This process of identity-construction, however, is never given once
and for all and is never unproblematic. Rather, it is a process of
constant renegotiation and struggle, a process in which actors
articulate and defend competing conceptions of cultural and political
identity. Arendt’s participatory conception of citizenship is
particularly relevant in this context since it articulates the
conditions for the establishment of collective identities. Once
citizenship is viewed as the process of active deliberation about
competing identities, its value resides in the possibility of
establishing forms of collective identity that can be acknowledged,
tested, and transformed in a discursive and democratic fashion.



With respect to the second claim, concerning the question of political
agency, it is important to stress the connection that Arendt
establishes between political action, understood as the active
engagement of citizens in the public realm, and the exercise of
effective political agency. This connection between action and agency
is one of the central contributions of Arendt’s participatory
conception of citizenship. According to Arendt, the active engagement
of citizens in the determination of the affairs of their community
provides them not only with the experience of public freedom and
public happiness, but also with a sense of political agency and
efficacy, the sense, in Thomas Jefferson’s words, of being
“participators in government.” In her view only the
sharing of power that comes from civic engagement and common
deliberation can provide each citizen with a sense of effective
political agency. Arendt’s strictures against political
representation must be understood in this light. She saw
representation as a substitute for the direct involvement of the
citizens, and as a means whereby the distinction between rulers and
ruled could reassert itself. As an alternative to a system of
representation based on bureaucratic parties and state structures,
Arendt proposed a federated system of councils through which citizens
could effectively determine their own political affairs. For Arendt,
it is only by means of direct political participation, that is, by
engaging in common action and collective deliberation, that
citizenship can be reaffirmed and political agency effectively
exercised.


6. The Life of the Mind and its Moral Significance




The Life of the Mind
, a work that was to encompass the three
faculties of thinking, willing and judging, provides an account of our
mental activities that was missing from Arendt’s earlier work on the

vita activa
. Due to her sudden death, Arendt was unable to
complete this late work. The two volumes on thinking and willing
appeared posthumously as 
The Life of the Mind
 (LM), and her
preparatory work on judgment was published separately (LKPP).



In the introduction to 
The Life of the Mind
, Arendt explains
that it was the Eichmann trial that sparked her interest in the
phenomenon of thinking (LM, 6). It was Eichmann’s
“inability to think” (EJ, 49) that struck her most,
because it was responsible in her view for his inability to judge
independently in a totalitarian system. Against this background, she
asked: “Is evil-doing … possible in default of not just
‘base motives’ … but of any motives whatever …
Might the problem of good and evil, our faculty for telling right from
wrong, be connected with our faculty of thought?” (LM, vol. I,
4–5). Although Arendt had in fact been repeatedly preoccupied
with thinking long before (Bernstein 2000), it is noteworthy that
Arendt’s investigation of thinking and judging cannot be separated
from her reflections on evil and morality, and vice versa.



In the following, we will first present the development of Arendt’s
concept of evil from 
The Origins of Totalitarianism
 to

Eichmann in Jerusalem
 (1). Thereafter we will show why
thinking and judging is morally relevant (2), and why, according to
Arendt, self-awareness is linked to autonomy (3). After that, we
present Arendt’s two models of political judgment (4). Lastly,
we will discuss the role of opinion and truth in politics (5).


6.1 
Eichmann in Jerusalem
: Arendt’s Reconceptualization of Evil 



In 1945, Arendt wrote that “the problem of evil will be the
fundamental question of postwar intellectual life in Europe.”
(EU, 134) Reflecting on its nature, she initially described the evil
committed by totalitarian regimes as “absolute” or
“radical” evil, using Kant’s expression. Radical
evil consists in the destruction of human plurality and spontaneity,
and in rendering human beings superfluous (OT, 445). In her Concluding
Remarks of OT’s first edition, she writes: “The danger of
the corpse factories and holes of oblivion is that today, with
populations and homelessness everywhere on the increase, masses of
people are continuously rendered superfluous of we continue to think
of our world in utilitarian terms.” (OT 1951, 433). As mentioned
in section 3, this type of evil cannot be grasped with traditional
explanations such as selfish motives (OT, 440), and is therefore
unpunishable and unforgivable (OT, 439).



Reporting on the trial of Adolf Eichmann gave Arendt’s reflections on
evil a new direction: Otto Adolf Eichmann was a German
SS-Obersturmbannführer and member of the Gestapo during the
Second World War who organized the deportation of Jews from Germany
and other European countries occupied by Nazi Germany as part of the
so-called Final Solution. He made logistically possible the murder of
six million Jews, and was therefore directly responsible for it. After
Eichmann was kidnapped by Israeli agents in Argentina, where he was
hiding, he was brought to trial in Israel in 1961, and found guilty of
crimes against the Jewish people. In 1962, Eichmann was hanged.



Arendt reported on the trial, which she attended in part, in articles
for the The New Yorker and published the text subsequently as

Eichmann in Jerusalem. A Report on the Banality of Evil
, her
most controversial book (Benhabib 2000). EJ contains four main
narratives: the trial and the course of the proceedings, the motives
of the Israeli government, the status of the Jewish Councils
(Judenräte) and, last but not least, the question of personal
responsibility under dictatorship in general and the accused’s
deeds and his state of mind in particular.



It was not only the tone of book, its use of irony and sarcasm, that
alienated many readers, but also her claim that some members of the
Jewish Councils were collaborators in that they provided the Nazis
with lists of their Jewish fellow citizens who were then deported to
the extermination camps in the East (EJ, 11, 91, 117–126).
Furthermore, her assessment of Eichmann, in whom she saw a
“clown” rather than a “monster” (EJ, 54), was
met with incomprehension.



The idea that evil is not necessarily committed by
‘demons’ can already be found in OT: “The mass man
whom Himmler organized for the greatest mass crimes ever committed in
history bore the features of the philistine rather than the mob
man” (OT, 338). But it was the book on Eichmann that introduced
the catchy phrase “banality of evil” prominently in its
subtitle. Although the expression appears only once more in the book
(Ej, 252), it contributed significantly to the fierce controversy that
erupted immediately after its publication: EJ has been gravely
misinterpreted as a trivialization of the Nazi crimes or even as a
defense of Eichmann (cf. Benhabib 2000). Many critics accused Arendt
of having mistaken the true, fanatically anti-Semitic Eichmann for a
mere bureaucrat (Ceserani 2006, Lipstadt 2011, Stangneth 2014).



Arendt, however, never wrote that Eichmann simply followed orders, as
he tried to claim. According to her, Eichmann was not a mere cog
within the Nazi machine, but a person who zealously transported Jews
to their death and who even disobeyed orders “to make the Final
solution final” (EJ, 146; cf. 137–14). Arendt believed him to be
fully responsibility for his deeds and supported the death
sentence.



Moreover, the phrase was not meant to denote a general theory of the
nature of evil, not even of totalitarian or Nazi evil, but as what
Arendt observed as a subjectively evident fact of Eichmann’s
personality (LM, 3–4). Thus, “the banality of evil” was
meant to describe not the nature of the deeds, but the character and
the motives of the doer Eichmann (Bernstein 2000; Benhabib 2000).



According to her own statements, Arendt proposed herself to report on
the trial because she absolutely wanted to know how someone looked
like who had done radical evil (cf. Heuer 1987, 58) However, what she
perceived during the trial was not a monster or a demon, but a person
endowed with “a curious, quite authentic inability to
think.” (TMC, 417) According to her, his evil deeds “could
not be traced to any particularity of wickedness, pathology or
ideological conviction in the doer, whose only personal distinction
was a perhaps extraordinary shallowness” (TMC, 417). Struck by
Eichmann’s inability to assess a situation himself or to express
himself without falling back on his repertoire of stock phrases and
clichés, Arendt attributed his monstrous deeds not to a
fanatical hatred of Jews (EJ, 146), but to his devotion to Hitler (EJ,
149) and his “thoughtlessness” (LM, 4), by which she
understood his “inability ever to look at anything from the
other’s point of view” (EJ, 48).



Following this experience, Arendt’s conviction about the nature
of evil changed: In a letter to Gershom Scholem from 1964, she
explained: “It is indeed my opinion now that evil is never
‘radical’, that it is only extreme, and that it possesses
neither depth nor any demonic dimension. It can overgrow and lay waste
the whole world precisely because it spreads like a fungus on the
surface. … Only the good has depth that can be radical.” (JP,
251)


6.2 The Moral Significance of Thinking and Judgment



In reaction to the controversy, Arendt tried to explain the
phenomenon she had perceived. In the works to follow, she asked
whether “the activity of thinking as such, the habit of
examining whatever happens to come to pass or to attract attention,
regardless of results and specific content, [could] be among the
conditions that make men abstain from evil-doing or even actually
‘condition’ them against it?” (LM, vol. I, 5)



Arendt attempted a reply by connecting the activity of thinking to
that of judging in a twofold manner. First, thinking — the
silent dialogue of me and myself — dissolves our fixed habits of
thought and the accepted rules of conduct, and thus prepares the way
for the activity of judging particulars without the aid of
pre-established universals. It is not that thinking provides judgment
with new rules for subsuming the particular under the universal.
Rather, it loosens the grip of the universal over the particular,
thereby releasing judgment from ossified categories of thought and
conventional standards of assessment. It is in times of historical
crisis that thinking ceases to be a marginal affair, because by
undermining all established criteria and values, it prepares the
individual to judge for him or herself instead of being carried away
by the actions and opinions of the majority.



The second way in which Arendt connected the activity of thinking with
that of judging is by showing that thinking, by actualizing the
dialogue of me and myself, which is given in consciousness, produces

conscience
 as a by-product.


6.3 Self-Consciousness, Social Pressure and Autonomy 



The impact of the Eichmann trial had forced Arendt to ask
whether we are entitled to presuppose “an independent human
faculty, unsupported by law and public opinion, that judges anew in
full spontaneity every deed and intent whenever the occasion
arises” (PRD, 187). In various essays from the 1960s and
70ies, Arendt explored the role of the mental faculties for the
conflict between moral autonomy and social pressure. In
“Personal Responsibility under Dictatorship” she discusses
the problem of voluntary conformity during the Nazi era and asks what
characterized the few people who refused to collaborate (RJ, 43). She
finds the answer in the ability to judge for oneself, which is rooted
in an explicit self-relationship: “[T]he nonparticipants […]
were the only ones who dared judge by themselves, and they were
capable of doing so, not because the old standards of right and wrong
were firmly planted in their mind and conscience, but because they
asked themselves to what extent they would still be able to live in
peace with themselves after having committed certain deeds” (RJ,
44). The prerequisites for moral autonomy are therefore not education
or firm moral convictions, but the certainty that, as a self-aware
being, one cannot avoid oneself: “If I disagree with other
people I can walk away; but I cannot walk away from myself, and
therefore I better first try to be in agreement with myself before I
take all others into consideration” (RJ, 90).



According to Arendt, having such an awareness of one’s own
self-relationship is the result of thinking, i.e. of the silent dialog
that one conducts with oneself (JR, 44f). Therefore, morality is not a
question of our relationship to others, but a question of our
relationship to ourselves. (RJ, 67) Following Kant, Arendt understands
this explicit self-relation as an awareness of one’s own autonomy,
i.e. as the realization that one is not a small cog in a big machine,
but that everyone is a responsible legislator: “If I am the
legislator, sin and crime can no longer be defined as disobedience to
somebody else’s law, but on the contrary as a refusal to act my
part as legislator of the world” (RJ, 69). The reference to
Kant’s Categorical Imperative shows that selfhood in Arendt’s moral
philosophy can no more be thought of in isolation than in her
political theory (cf. EU, 441). The morally responsible self does not
have to make authentic, but universalizable, representative
decisions.



Arendt called this capacity to think representatively an
“enlarged mentality,” adopting the same terms that Kant
employed in his Third Critique to characterize aesthetic judgment. The
“enlarged mentality” judges both independently of all
others and includes the perspective of all others in its judgment.
Although thinking is a lonely activity in Arendt’s eyes, the inner
dialog can stay in contact with the world as long as the world is
represented in the dialog of the self (OT, 476.). Only those who
actualize this difference in their identity allow conscience to emerge
as a by-product of consciousness (RJ, 189). When Arendt describes the
public sphere as a condition of judgment (DT, 570), she does not
necessarily mean the actual presence of other people, but this inner
plurality. Listening to such an inner representation of other people
can help to withstand the pressure of public opinion.


6.4 Judgment and Politics: Two Models



The foregoing account has underlined the moral significance of
thinking and judgment. For Arendt, however, the capacity to judge is
no less a 
political
 ability insofar as it enables individuals
to orient themselves in the public realm and to judge the phenomena
that are disclosed within it from a standpoint that is relatively
detached and impartial.



Together with the theory of action, her unfinished theory of judgment
represents her central legacy to twentieth century political thought.
We now explore some of the key aspects of her theory of judgment, and
will examine its place in the architectonic of Arendt’s theory
of politics. Arendt’s theory of judgment was never developed as
systematically or extensively as her theory of action. She intended to
complete her study of the life of the mind by devoting the third
volume to the faculty of judgment, but was not able to do so because
of her untimely death in 1975. What she left was a number of
reflections scattered in 
The Life of the Mind
, a series of
lectures on Kant’s political philosophy (LKPP), the essay
“Thinking and Moral Considerations” (TMC, 417–46),
and two articles included in 
Between Past and Future
 where
judgment and opinion are treated in relation to culture and taste
(“The Crisis in Culture” – BPF, 197–226) and
with respect to the question of truth (“Truth and
Politics” – BPF, 227–64). However, these writings do
not present a unified theory of judgment but rather two distinct
models, one based on the standpoint of the actor, the other on the
standpoint of the spectator, which are somewhat at odds with each
other.



Arendt’s writings on the theme of judgment can be seen to fall
into two more or less distinct phases, an early one in which judgment
is the faculty of political 
actors
 acting in the
public realm, and a later one in which it is the privilege of
non-participating 
spectators
, primarily poets and
historians, who seek to understand the meaning of the past and to
reconcile us to what has happened. In this later formulation Arendt is
no longer concerned with judging as a feature of political life as
such, as the faculty which is exercised by actors in order to decide
how to act in the public realm, but with judgment as a component in
the life of the mind, the faculty through which the privileged
spectators can recover meaning from the past and thereby reconcile
themselves to time and, retrospectively, to tragedy.



As to the first account: In the essays “The Crisis in
Culture” and “Truth and Politics”, Arendt treated
judgment as a faculty that enables political actors to decide what
courses of action to undertake in the public realm, what kind of
objectives are most appropriate or worth pursuing, as well as who to
praise or blame for past actions or for the consequences of past
decisions. In this model judgment is viewed as a specifically
political ability, namely, as “the ability to see things not
only from one’s own point of view but from the perspective of
all those who happen to be present,” and as being “one of
the fundamental abilities of man as a political being insofar as it
enables him to orient himself in the public realm, in the common
world” (BPF, 221). In contrast to speculative thought, judging
has its roots in common sense. Therefore, judging “is one, if
not the most, important activity in which this
sharing-the-world-with-others comes to pass” (BPF, 221).
Moreover, Arendt stressed the non-coercive character of judgment, the
fact that it can only appeal to but never force the agreement of
others, she claims that “this ‘wooing’ or persuading
corresponds closely to what the Greeks called 
peithein
, the
convincing and persuading speech which they regarded as the typically
political form of people talking with one another” (BPF,
222).



For the second account, Arendt, based her theory of political
judgment on Kant’s aesthetics in his 
Critique of
Judgment
, which she claimed contained Kant’s unwritten
political philosophy, (cf. BPF, 219–20). For Arendt it is the
spectators who have the privilege of judging impartially and
disinterestedly, and in doing so they exercise two crucial faculties,

imagination
 and 
sensus communis
. Through the
imagination one can represent objects that are no longer present and
thus establish the distance necessary for an impartial judgment. Once
this distancing has occurred, one is in a position to reflect upon
these representations from a number of different perspectives, and
thereby to reach a judgment about the proper value of an object. Kant
believed that for our judgments to be valid we must transcend our
private or subjective conditions in favor of public and
intersubjective ones, and we are able to do this by appealing to our
community sense, our 
sensus communis
. The criterion for
judgment, then, is 
communicability
, and the standard for
deciding whether our judgments are indeed communicable is to see
whether they could fit with the 
sensus communis
 of others.
Arendt points out that the emphasis on the communicability of
judgments of taste, and the correlative notion of an enlarged
mentality, link up effortlessly with Kant’s idea of a united
mankind living in eternal peace. She argues that “It is by
virtue of this idea of mankind, present in every single man, that men
are human, and they can be called civilized or humane to the extent
that this idea becomes the principle not only of their judgments but
of their actions. It is at this point that 
actor
 and

spectator
 become united; the maxim of the actor and the
maxim, the ‘standard,’ according to which the spectator
judges the spectacle of the world, become one” (LKPP, 75).


6.5 Opinion and Truth in Politics 



Against Plato and Hobbes, who denigrated the role of opinion in
political matters, Arendt reasserts the value and importance of
political discourse, of deliberation and persuasion, and thus of a
politics that acknowledges difference and the plurality of opinions.
This, however, raises the question as to which opinions are justified
or which judgments can claim 
validity
.



For Arendt, the validity of political judgment depends on our ability
to think “representatively,” that is, from the standpoint
of everyone else, so that we are able to look at the world from a
number of different perspectives: “The more people’s
standpoints I have present in my mind while I am pondering a given
issue, and the better I can imagine how I would feel and think if I
were in their place, the stronger will be my capacity for
representative thinking and the more valid my final conclusions, my
opinion.” (BPF, 241) This ability can only be acquired and
tested in a public forum where individuals have the opportunity to
exchange their opinions on particular matters and see whether they
accord with the opinions of others. In this respect the process of
opinion formation is never a solitary activity; rather, it requires a
genuine encounter with different opinions so that a particular issue
may be examined from every possible standpoint until, as she puts it,
“it is flooded and made transparent by the full light of human
comprehension” (BPF, 242). Debate and discussion, and the
capacity to enlarge one’s perspective, are indeed crucial to the
formation of opinions that can claim more than subjective validity;
individuals may hold personal opinions on many subject matters, but
they can form representative opinions only by enlarging their
standpoint to incorporate those of others. In this respect one is
never alone while forming an opinion; as Arendt notes, “even if
I shun all company or am completely isolated while forming an opinion,
I am not simply together only with myself in the solitude of
philosophical thought; I remain in this world of universal
interdependence, where I can make myself the representative of
everybody else” (BPF, 242).



The 
representative character
 of judgment and opinion
has important implications for the question of validity. Arendt always
stressed that the formation of valid opinions requires a public space
where individuals can test and purify their views through a process of
mutual debate and enlightenment. She was, however, quite opposed to
the idea that opinions should be measured by the standard of truth, or
that debate should be conducted according to strict scientific
standards of validity. In her view, truth belongs to the realm of
cognition, the realm of logic, mathematics and the strict sciences,
and carries always an element of coercion, since it precludes debate
and must be accepted by every individual in possession of her rational
faculties. Set against the plurality of opinions, truth has a despotic
character: it compels universal assent, leaves the mind little freedom
of movement, eliminates the diversity of views and reduces the
richness of human discourse. In this respect, truth is anti-political,
since by eliminating debate and diversity it eliminates the very
principles of political life. As Arendt writes, “The trouble is
that factual truth, like all other truth, peremptorily claims to be
acknowledged and precludes debate, and debate constitutes the very
essence of political life. The modes of thought and communication that
deal with truth, if seen from the political perspective, are
necessarily domineering; they don’t take into account other
people’s opinions, and taking these into account is the hallmark
of all strictly political thinking” (BPF, 241).



Arendt’s defense of 
opinion
 is motivated not
just by her belief that truth leaves no room for debate or dissent, or
for the acknowledgment of difference, but also by her conviction that
our reasoning faculties can only flourish in a dialogic context. She
cites Kant’s remark that “the external power that deprives
man of the freedom to communicate his thoughts publicly deprives him
at the same time of his freedom to think,” and underlines the
fact that for Kant the only guarantee of the correctness of our
thinking is that “we think, as it were, in community with others
to whom we communicate our thoughts as they communicate theirs to
us” (BPF, 234–5).



For Arendt opinion is not a defective form of knowledge that should be
transcended or left behind as soon as one is in possession of the
truth. Rather, it is a distinct form of knowledge which arises out of
the collective deliberation of citizens, and which requires the use of
the imagination and the capacity to think
“representatively.” By deliberating in common and engaging
in “representative thinking” citizens are in fact able to
form opinions that can claim intersubjective validity. It is important
to stress that Arendt does not want to dismiss the philosophers’
attempt to find universal or absolute standards of knowledge and
cognition, but to check their desire to impose those standards upon
the sphere of human affairs, since they would eliminate its plurality
and essential relativity. The imposition of a single or absolute
standard into the domain of 
praxis
 would do away with the
need to persuade others of the relative merits of an opinion, to
elicit their consent to a specific proposal, or to obtain their
agreement with respect to a particular policy.



Now, we must be careful not to impute to Arendt the view that

truth
 has no legitimate role to play in politics or
in the sphere of human affairs. She does indeed assert that “All
truths — not only the various kinds of rational truth but also
factual truth — are opposed to opinion in their mode of
asserting validity” (BPF, 239), since they all carry an element
of compulsion. However, she is only preoccupied with the negative
consequences of rational truth when applied to the sphere of politics
and collective deliberation, while she defends the importance of
factual truth for the preservation of an accurate account of the past
and for the very existence of political communities. Factual truth,
she writes, “is always related to other people: it concerns
events and circumstances in which many are involved; it is established
by witnesses and depends upon testimony … It is political by
nature.” It follows, therefore, that “facts and opinions,
though they must be kept apart, are not antagonistic to each other;
they belong to the same realm. Facts inform opinions, and opinions,
inspired by different interests and passions, can differ widely and
still be legitimate as long as they respect factual truth. Freedom of
opinion is a farce unless factual information is guaranteed and the
facts themselves are not in dispute. In other words, factual truth
informs political thought just as rational truth informs philosophical
speculation” (BPF, 238).



The relationship between facts and opinions is thus one of mutual
entailment: if opinions were not based on correct information and the
free access to all relevant facts they could scarcely claim any
validity. And if they were to be based on fantasy, self-deception, or
deliberate falsehood, then no possibility of genuine debate and
argumentation could be sustained. Both factual truth and the general
habit of truth-telling are therefore basic to the formation of sound
opinions and to the flourishing of political debate. Moreover, if the
record of the past were to be destroyed by organized lying, or be
distorted by an attempt to rewrite history, political life would be
deprived of one of its essential and stabilizing elements. In sum,
both factual truth and the practice of truth-telling are essential to
political life. The antagonism for Arendt is between rational truth
and well-grounded opinion, since the former does not allow for debate
and dissent, while the latter thrives on it. Arendt’s defense of
opinion must therefore be understood as a defense of political
deliberation, and of the role that persuasion and dissuasion play in
all matters affecting the political community.






Bibliography


Works by Arendt








[LA]


Der Liebesbegriff bei Augustin
. Berlin: Julius Springer
Verlag, 1929. Translation as 
Love and Saint Augustine
, with
an interpretive essay by Joanna V. Scott and Judith C. Stark. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 1996.
 




[RV]


Rahel Varnhagen: The Life of a Jewish Woman
. Revised
edition translated into English by Richard and Clara Winston. New
York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1974. Critical edition edited by
Liliane Weissberg. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press,
1997.
 




[OT]


The Origins of Totalitarianism
. New York: Harcourt
Brace Jovanovich, 1951. Third edition with new prefaces, 1973.






[HC]


The Human Condition
. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, 1958.
 




[EJ]


Eichmann in Jerusalem: A Report on the Banality of
Evil
. New York: Viking Press, 1963. Revised and enlarged edition,
1965.
 




[OR]


On Revolution
. New York: Viking Press, 1963. Revised
second edition, 1965.
 




[BPF]


Between Past and Future
. New York: Viking Press, 1961.
Revised edition, 1968.
 




[MDT]


Men in Dark Times
. New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich,
1968.
 




[OV]


On Violence
. New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich,
1970.
 




[CR]


Crises of the Republic
. New York: Harcourt Brace
Jovanovich, 1972.
 




[JP]


The Jew as Pariah
. Edited and with an introduction by
Ron H. Feldman. New York: Grove Press, 1978.
 




[JW]


The Jewish Writings
. Edited by Jerome Kohn and Ron H.
Feldman. New York: Schocken Books, 2007.
 




[LM]


The Life of the Mind
. New York: Harcourt Brace
Jovanovich, 1978.
 




[LKPP]


Lectures on Kant’s Political Philosophy
. Edited
and with an interpretive essay by Ronald Beiner. Chicago: University
of Chicago Press, 1982.
 




[EU]


Essays in Understanding: 1930–1954
. Edited and
with an introduction by Jerome Kohn. New York: Harcourt Brace &
Company, 1994.
 




[RJ]


Responsibility and Judgment
. Edited and with an
introduction by Jerome Kohn. New York: Schocken Books, 2003.






[PP]


The Promise of Politics
. Edited and with an
introduction by Jerome Kohn. New York: Schocken Books, 2005.






[RPW]


Hannah Arendt: The Recovery of the Public World.
 Edited by Melvyn A.
Hill. New York: St. Martin’s Press, 1979.
 




[DT] 


Denktagebuch 1950–1973.
 Edited by Ursula Ludz and Ingeborg
Nordmann. Munich and Zurich: Pieper 2002.
 




[UP]


“Understanding and Politics.” 
Partisan
Review
, vol. 20, no. 4 (July–August 1953): 377–92.
Reprinted in 
Essays in Understanding: 1930–1954
.






[PRD]


“Personal Responsibility under Dictatorship.”

The Listener
, (6 August 1964): 185–205. Reprinted in

Responsibility and Judgment
.
 




[TMC]


“Thinking and Moral Considerations: A Lecture.”

Social Research
, 38(3) (Autumn 1971): 417–46. Reprinted
in 
Social Research
, 51(1) (Spring 1984): 7–37, and in

Responsibility and Judgment
.
 




[PRPI]


“Public Rights and Private Interests.” In M. Mooney
and F. Stuber, eds., 
Small Comforts for Hard Times: Humanists on
Public Policy
. New York: Columbia University Press, 1977.


 




Secondary Literature




Aschheim, S. (ed.), 2001, 
Hannah Arendt in Jerusalem
,
Berkeley: University of California Press.


Baehr, P., 2010, 
Hannah Arendt, Totalitarianism, and the
Social Sciences
, Stanford: Stanford University Press.


Baluch, F., 2014, “Arendt’s Machiavellian
Moment”, 
European Journal of Political Theory
, 13 (2):
154–177.


Barnouw, D., 1990, 
Visible Spaces: Hannah Arendt and the
German-Jewish Experience
, Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University
Press.


Benhabib, S., 1996, 
The Reluctant Modernism of Hannah
Arendt
, London: Sage Publications.


–––, 2000, “Arendt’s Eichmann in
Jerusalem”, D. Villa (ed.), 
The Cambridge Companion to
Hannah Arendt (Cambridge Companions to Philosophy)
, Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.


–––, 2003, 
The Reluctant Modernism of Hannah
Arendt. New Edition with a New Preface and an Appendix
, New York:
Rowman and Littlefield Publishers.


––– (ed.), 2010, 
Politics in Dark Times:
Encounters with Hannah Arendt
, Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.


Berkowitz, R., Keenan, T. and Katz, J. (eds.), 2009, 
Thinking
in Dark Times: Hannah Arendt on Ethics and Politics
, New York:
Fordham University Press.


Bernauer, J. (ed.), 1987, 
Amor Mundi: Explorations in the
Faith and Thought of Hannah Arendt
, Dordrecht: Martinus
Nijhoff.


Bernstein, R., 1986, 
Philosophical Profiles
, Cambridge:
Polity Press.


–––, 1996, 
Hannah Arendt and the Jewish
Question
, Cambridge: Polity Press.


–––, 2000, “Arendt on thinking”,
D. Villa (ed.), 
The Cambridge Companion to Hannah Arendt
,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.


–––, 2018, 
Why Read Hannah Arendt Now?
,
Cambridge: Polity Press.


Birmingham, P., 2006, 
Hannah Arendt and Human Rights: The
Predicament of Common Responsibility
, Bloomington: Indiana
University Press.


Bowen-Moore, P., 1989, 
Hannah Arendt’s Philosophy of
Natality
, London: Macmillan.


Bradshaw, L., 1989, 
Acting and Thinking: The Political Thought
of Hannah Arendt
, Toronto: University of Toronto Press.


Calhoun, C. and McGowan, J. (eds.), 1997, 
Hannah Arendt and
the Meaning of Politics
, Minneapolis: University of Minnesota
Press.


Canovan, M., 1974, 
The Political Thought of Hannah
Arendt
, London: J. M. Dent.


–––, 1992, 
Hannah Arendt: A Reinterpretation
of Her Political Thought
, Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.


Cesarani, D., 2006, 
Becoming Eichmann: Rethinking the Life,
Crimes and Trial of a “Desk Murderer”
, Cambridge, MA:
Da Capo Press.


Dietz, M., 2002, 
Turning Operations: Feminism, Arendt, and
Politics
, New York and London: Routledge.


Disch, L., 1994, 
Hannah Arendt and the Limits of
Philosophy
, Ithaca: Cornell University Press.


Dossa, S., 1988, 
The Public Realm and The Public Self: The
Political Theory of Hannah Arendt
, Waterloo, Ontario: Wilfred
Laurier University Press.


Ettinger, E., 1995, 
Hannah Arendt/Martin Heidegger
, New
Haven, CT: Yale University Press.


Gottsegen, M., 1993, 
The Political Thought of Hannah
Arendt
, Albany, NY: State University of New York Press.


Hansen, P., 1993, 
Hannah Arendt: Politics, History and
Citizenship
, Cambridge: Polity Press.


Hill, M. (ed.), 1979, 
Hannah Arendt: The Recovery of the
Public World
, New York: St. Martin’s Press.


Hinchman, L. and Hinchman, S. (eds.), 1994, 
Hannah Arendt:
Critical Essays
, Albany, NY: State University of New York
Press.


Honig, B. (ed.), 1995, 
Feminist Interpretations of Hannah
Arendt
, University Park, PA: Pennsylvania State University
Press.


Isaac, J., 1992, 
Arendt, Camus, and Modern Rebellion
, New
Haven, CT: Yale University Press.


Kaplan, G. and Kessler, C. (eds.), 1989, 
Hannah Arendt:
Thinking, Judging, Freedom
, Sydney: Allen & Unwin.


Kateb. G., 1984, 
Hannah Arendt: Politics, Conscience,
Evil
, Oxford: Martin Robertson.


Kielmansegg, P., Mewes, H. and Glaser-Schmidt, E. (eds.), 1995,

Hannah Arendt and Leo Strauss: German Emigrés and American
Political Thought after World War II
, Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.


Kohn, J. and May, L. (eds.), 1996, 
Hannah Arendt: Twenty Years
Later
, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.


Kristeva, J., 2001, 
Hannah Arendt
, New York: Columbia
University Press.


Lederman, S., 2016, “Philosophy, Politics and Participatory
Democracy in Hannah Arendt’s Political Thought”,

History of Political Thought
, 37 (3): 480–508.


May, D., 1986, 
Hannah Arendt
, Harmondsworth: Penguin
Books.


McGowan, J., 1998, 
Hannah Arendt: An Introduction
,
Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.


Nedelsky, J., and Beiner, R. (eds.), 2001, 
Judgment,
Imagination, and Politics: Themes from Kant and Arendt
, New York:
Rowman and Littlefield Publishers.


Parekh, B., 1981, 
Hannah Arendt and the Search for a New
Political Philosophy
, London: Macmillan.


Passerin d’Entrèves, M., 1994, 
The Political
Philosophy of Hannah Arendt
, New York and London: Routledge.


Pitkin, H., 1998, 
The Attack of the Blob: Hannah
Arendt’s Concept of the Social
, Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.


Ring, J., 1997, 
The Political Consequences of Thinking
,
Albany, NY: State University of New York Press.


Stangneth, B., 2014, 
Eichmann Before Jerusalem: The Unexamined
Life of a Mass Murderer
, New York: Knopf Doubleday Publishing
Group.


Taminiaux, J., 1997, 
The Thracian Maid and the Professional
Thinker: Arendt and Heidegger
, Albany, NY: State University of
New York Press.


Tömmel, T. N., 2013, 
Wille und Passion. Der Liebesbegriff
bei Heidegger und Arendt
, Berlin: Suhrkamp.


Villa, D., 1996, 
Arendt and Heidegger: The Fate of the
Political
, Princeton: Princeton University Press.


–––, 1999, 
Politics, Philosophy, Terror:
Essays on the Thought of Hannah Arendt
, Princeton: Princeton
University Press.


––– (ed.), 2000, 
The Cambridge Companion to
Hannah Arendt
, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.


Watson, D., 1992, 
Hannah Arendt
, London: Fontana
Press.


Whitfield, S., 1980, 
Into the Dark: Hannah Arendt and
Totalitarianism
, Philadelphia: Temple University Press.


Wolin, S., 1977, “Hannah Arendt and the Ordinance of
Time,” 
Social Research
, 44(1): 91–105.


Young-Bruehl, E., 1982, 
Hannah Arendt: For Love of the
World
, New Haven: Yale University Press. Second edition,
2004.


–––, 2006, 
Why Arendt Matters
, New
Haven, CT: Yale University Press.








Academic Tools










How to cite this entry
.








Preview the PDF version of this entry
 at the
 
Friends of the SEP Society
.








Look up topics and thinkers related to this entry

 at the Internet Philosophy Ontology Project (InPhO).








Enhanced bibliography for this entry

at 
PhilPapers
, with links to its database.












Other Internet Resources




“
Hannah Arendt
”,
 entry by Majid Yar, in 
The Internet Encyclopedia of
Philosophy


“
Hannah Arendt
”,
 entry in the Wikipedia.








Related Entries




Aristotle
 |
 
Benjamin, Walter
 |
 
existentialism
 |
 
Heidegger, Martin
 |
 
Hobbes, Thomas
 |
 
Husserl, Edmund
 |
 
Jaspers, Karl
 |
 
Kant, Immanuel
 |
 
Machiavelli, Niccolò
 |
 
phenomenology
 |
 
Plato










 






Copyright © 2024
 by



Tatjana Tömmel
<
tatjana
.
noemi
@
gmx
.
de
>

Maurizio Passerin d’Entreves

    




 









  Open access to the SEP is made possible by a world-wide funding initiative.

  Please Read How You Can Help Support the Growth and Development of the Encyclopedia




 

