











 
 Entry Navigation 






Entry Contents


Bibliography


Academic Tools


Friends PDF Preview 


Author and Citation Info 
 


Back to Top 


























Bradley’s Moral Philosophy
First published Wed Mar 6, 2024







[
Editor’s Note: The following entry replaces and includes material from the former entry titled
 
Bradley’ Moral and Political Philosophy
.
]






F.H. Bradley’s moral philosophy remains a source for debates
among the historians of philosophy; its rich—and
under-researched—material has much to offer not only to the
history of philosophy but also to contemporary normative ethics and
meta-ethics (especially moral psychology). Luckily, after a period of
neglect, there is a revival of interest in Bradley’s ethics. New
attempts are made to reconstruct and reinterpret his ideas, giving
them a well-deserved place within the current debates.



As a moral philosopher, Bradley is mostly interested in the question
about good personality. The problem of the right action does not have
a central role in his works (even though it is possible to reconstruct
a theory of moral action based on his writings). He asks 
What sort
of person am I to become
? rather than 
What should I do
?
The type of answer that Bradley gives to this question with his theory
of self-realization indicates that he is developing a version of
non-instrumental ethical idealism, according to which the goal of
moral life is the realization of the moral ideal for its own sake.

Ethical Studies
 is mainly concerned with coming to understand
moral agency and personhood, and this, among other things, entails
laying bare the structure of volitional choice.



The best source on Bradley’s ethics is 
Ethical Studies
,
the philosopher’s first major book. The book was first published
in 1876, followed by a second edition with Bradley’s comments
for revision in 1927. (All references in this article are to the 1962
paperback edition with R. Wollheim’s introduction). Here, he
discusses a wide range of topics relevant to moral philosophy
(including, the freedom of will, justification of morality, moral
duties, obligation). But by far the major contribution of this book is
in moral psychology with its discussion of moral selfhood (cf. Keene
1970), moral ideals, and moral motivation. The book is also valuable
for its critical analysis of the key claims of consequentialism,
hedonism, Kantianism, and Hegelianism. Many classic arguments against
these theories originate from 
Ethical Studies
.



Bradley’s minor works in psychology offer additional insights
into his approach to ethics. As D. Crossley (1989b: 59) notes, these
articles explore in detail concepts and ideas which are only briefly
introduced in the book. Most interesting for ethicists is the reprint
of Bradley’s articles titled 
Collected Essays
 (1935)
and especially the articles: “On Pleasure, Pain, Desire, and
Volition” (1888); “The Definition of Will
(I–III)” (1902–04, relevant to the discussion of
motivation, desire, conation, wish, needs, pleasure, and pain);
“Some Remarks on Conation” (1901, desire and conation);
“Can a Man Sin against Knowledge” (1884, the nature of
moral judgment); “On the Treatment of Sexual Detail in
Literature” (desire); “On Mental Conflict and
Imputation” (1902, desire and personal identity). 
The
Collected Works of F.H. Bradley
 (1999) is a treasure trove of
previously unpublished works by Bradley, including moral psychology
and normative ethics: “Notes towards 
Ethical Studies

[c. 1874–1875]” (Vol. I); “On Morality [1877 or
1878]” (Vol. I); “MS BK Z: Chiefly on Psychological Topics
[c. 1893–1902]” (Vol. II); “MS BK W: The Final
Commonplace Book [1915–1924]” (Vol. III). Another source
is “XXV. Goodness” of “Appearance and Reality”
and it is of primary interest to those who study the evolution of
Bradley’s views as well as the way the ethics of later Bradley
fits in the context of his metaphysics.








1. Background and Influences


2. “My Station and Its Duties”


3. Moral Self as a Precondition for Moral Responsibility


4. Moral Relevance of Desires


5. Integrity


6. Moral Ideal


7. Moral Development


8. The Limits of Morality


Bibliography




Primary Literature


Secondary Literature


Bibliographical Material






Academic Tools


Other Internet Resources


Related Entries










1. Background and Influences



The writings of the Oxford Idealists, F. H. Bradley and his teacher T.
H. Green, reflect the influence of Kant and Hegel on English moral
philosophy in the latter part of the nineteenth century. To the extent
that either draws on other sources it is to Aristotle that they turn
rather than to British moral philosophers such as Butler, Hume or
Reid. Despite the undeniable influence of Aristotle on Bradley’s
thought in general, the extent to which Aristotle’s ethics has
influenced Bradley’s moral philosophy is open for debate. For
example, virtue never became for him a central topic. We won’t
find in his 
Ethical Studies
 an account of virtue or a theory
explaining which specific character traits count as virtue.
Aristotle’s influence is apparent, however, from the fact that
Bradley, alongside Green (1883), offers a type of perfectionist
account of morality that is articulated in terms of the concept of
self-realization (Stern 2017; Hurka 1993; Crossley 1977). One evidence
of that is Bradley’s claim that all moral duties are
self-regarding duties; another is his tendency to connect moral
progress with the realization of the truth of human nature. Given
this, Bradley’s approach falls under the category of what T.
Hurka (1993), calls 
perfectionism
 in the narrow sense which
sees perfection as excellence defined by human nature.



Bradley’s philosophy is commonly categorized as idealism.
However, even though it is often clear what this term refers to in
metaphysics (most often, either to an ontological claim that reality
is mind-dependent or an epistemological claim that our knowledge of
the world is determined by the structure of the mind itself), it is
less clear what the term 
idealism
 refers to in ethics. If
idealism is used in the sense of the 
idealist ethics
 (Mander
2016, 2013)—as a means to describe a set of views commonly
shared by philosophers who consider themselves metaphysical
idealists—then, despite the fact that Bradley certainly is a
metaphysical idealist (it is less certain, however, which of the two
above-mentioned metaphysical claims he accepts), to say that he
develops an idealist ethics raises more questions than answers, since
his moral views diverge greatly from those of other metaphysical
idealists.



Metaphysical idealists are preoccupied with the nature of ideas, i.e.,
cognitive constructs that are either the representations of the world
or the internal structures of the mind itself that precede and
precondition any experience and knowledge of the world.
Bradley’s idealism, on the other hand, is focused on a different
concept altogether: 
ideals
, i.e., normative concepts that
express standards of perfection. Given the central role of ideals in
Bradley’s ethics, it makes sense to tag his moral theory as

ethical idealism
. Long after Bradley, one version of ethical
idealism was developed by N. Rescher (1987) who proposed a kind of

instrumental ethical idealism
. Its central thesis is that
ideals, despite being unrealistic and unachievable, have the
instrumental value of motivating agents to strive for higher, more
ambitious goals and achieve more than they otherwise would. In
contrast to Rescher, for Bradley, the moral ideal is the goal in
itself. Hence, we can tag his version of ethical idealism as

non-instrumental ethical idealism
.



Much of Bradley’s attention in 
Ethical Studies
 was
taken up with critical analyses of utilitarianism—the dominant
ethical theory of the day—and the hedonism to which it was
wedded, whether that view advanced the primacy of pleasure either in
the form of a psychological account of motivation or as the felt state
that right actions aim at maximizing. Indeed, Bradley not only had to
dispense with the claims of the older utilitarians, such as Bentham
and Mill (cf., e.g., Crossley 2000; MacNiven 1984), but also had to
face the new defense of utilitarianism advanced by Henry Sidgwick, who
published his 
The Methods of Ethics
 (1874) virtually
simultaneously with Bradley’s 
Ethical Studies
 (1876).
For a greater part of the twentieth century Bradley’s critical
attacks on hedonism and utilitarianism were considered to be the main
subject of his book. Despite the central role of Bradley’s
arguments in the debate against utilitarianism and hedonism,
over-emphasizing their role in the structure of the book led many to
overlook the main topic of 
Ethical Studies
, i.e., moral
self-realization and an entire set of relevant topics, such as the
moral self and moral action (incl., moral responsibility and
motivation).



In his opposition to utilitarianism, Bradley is often seen as a
neo-Hegelian. Even though it is true to a certain extent that Bradley
was inspired by Hegel, it is less obvious to what extent he had been
influenced by Hegel’s ethics or his dialectic method. It is
worth noting, however, that Bradley himself denied being a Hegelian or
employing Hegelian methodology in any systematic way. The assumption
that Bradley uses Hegelian dialectic as the main argumentative method
in 
Ethical Studies
 most likely originates from R.
Wollheim’s introduction to the second edition of the book and
has persisted ever since. Wollheim himself does not prove his claim,
and as a result it is difficult to know with certainty what he had in
mind. The reason behind this interpretation of Bradley’s method
is the desire to clear Bradley from the accusation of traditionalism
and show that 
Ethical Studies
 must be read beyond Essay V
“My Station and Its Duties”. The identification of
Bradley’s ethics with the theory of my station and its duties
became a commonplace after Sidgwick’s review (1876) and R.
Ross’ edition of 
Ethical Studies
, which omitted Essays
I, VI, and VII (Bradley 1951). The good that Wollheim’s claim
does is that it motivates the reader not to stop at Essay V, and to
expect that there is more to Bradley’s ethics than the
discussion of “my station and its duties”. The downside of
Wollheim’s claim, however, is that it is too far-fetched and it
blinds the reader to the main topics of 
Ethical Studies
, its
key message, and keeps her confused as to the relation of its various
arguments as well as to the role of the final chapter, “Ideal
Morality”. As a result, there is a risk for the reader to
overemphasize the role of social morality (cf., e.g., Keene 2009) in
Bradley’s ethics and misattribute some of his central
arguments.


2. “My Station and Its Duties”



Since Wollheim wrote his introduction to 
Ethical Studies
,
scholars such as Candlish (1978) and Nicholson (1990) argued
extensively against a popular (but poorly substantiated) view (e.g.,
Krook 1959, Stebbing 1948, Santayana 1933, Sabine 1915, Rashdall 1907)
that Bradley’s moral philosophy is reducible to a theory of
“my station and its duties”. As a result, the reductionist
view is no longer accepted, and Bradley is no longer associated with
conservativism and communitarianism. However, the perception of
Bradley’s ethics is not fully free from the Hegelian spell, and
there is still a lot of confusion concerning Bradley’s view on
the 
moral significance
 of compliance with social demands,
justified by custom and tradition—when this is understood as an
element of “my station and its duties” theory. This
confusion is deeply rooted in the way the structure of 
Ethical
Studies
 is interpreted, what role Essay VI “The Ideal
Morality” is given in the overall flow of the book’s
argument and how it is positioned relative to Essay V “My
Station and its Duties”.



Until recently, the predominant view among historians of philosophy
was that





[t]he concept of “My Station and its Duties” is the core
of Bradley’s moral theory. The last two essays … are
devoted to further elaboration of this notion…. (Warnock 1960:
12)





This results in something that can be referred to an
“add-on” view, according to which the “my station
and its duties” theory, after acknowledgment of its limitations,
is 
mostly
 accepted by Bradley with 
some
 corrections
or 
additions
 that are described in Essay VI (cf., e.g.,
Wollheim 1969: 246–47; Candlish 1978: 163–4; Nicholson
1990: 33–5; Mander 2011: 190–1). As a result, the concepts
of the ideal morality and the moral ideal are given lesser role in the
overall structure of the book, seen as a supplement to social
requirements or as something to fall back onto, if the social norms
turn out to be corrupt. This interpretation of Bradley is being
challenged. For example, Babushkina (2019) argues that this
“add-on” view of Bradley’s theory of Ideal Morality,
is problematic, as it largely underplays the seriousness of the
objections that Bradley puts forth against the Hegelian “theory
of my station and its duties” in Essays V and VI. But even
putting this aside, were we to accept the “add-on”
interpretation, it is still unclear how a supplementation of this sort
can make the theory of “my station and its duties”
plausible as 
a moral theory
. It is not surprising then, that
when accepting such reading of 
Ethical Studies
, some scholars
discard Bradley’s moral theory altogether (Brink 2003; Banchetti
1992; Bell 1984; Norman 1983; Daly 1963).



One reason for the confusion around the concept of “my station
and its duties” is the multiplicity of the meanings attached to
this expression in 
Ethical Studies
 and the obscurity of
Bradley’s style of writing. As Babushkina (2019) point out, the
popular “add-on” interpretation fails to take into account
the distinction between “my station and its duties” as




a Hegel’s normative thesis (connected to the concept of
Sittlichkeit) described and criticized in Essay V;


a related concept of positional duties or social commands (cf.
Stern 2013), i.e., tasks that we have due to occupying a certain
position/role;


the revised “my station and its duties” thesis that
Bradley accepts, according to which our moral obligations may coincide
with (but are not reducible to) our positional duties, where the
obligation is constituted by what others have a reason to expect from
us from an ideal point of view (Essay VI).





Bradley does not explicitly define these three meanings of “my
station and its duties”, but the difference is clear from the
context and flow of the argument throughout 
Ethical Studies
.
Acknowledging the difference between the concept of “my station
and its duties” in Essay V and VI reveals that far from
accepting (with some corrections and supplements) the Hegelian theory
of Sittlichkeit, Bradley rejects the reduction of moral properties to
social, leading to the conclusion that what is socially required from
us constitutes our moral obligation only when this social requirement
is justified from the ideal point of view (given, of course,
Bradley’s understanding of the nature the ideal).



An alternative to the popular “add-on” view, shifts the
interpretative focus from Essay V and the theory of “my station
and its duties” with its reductionist view of morality towards
Essay VI and the identification of the moral with the ideal (James
Bradley 1996; MacNiven 1996). For example, D. Ilodigwe writes that
Bradley introduces the moral ideal as a concept





in terms of which the legitimate demands of these varied regions of
the self [empirical, transcendental, and social] are realised





and denies that





the realisation of the social self necessarily [is] the realisation of
the ideal self, except the social self is in conformity with its ideal
self. (2004: 68)





From this standpoint, the Ideal Morality chapter is the central part
of the argument of the book, which culminates debate about the nature
of the moral self.


3. Moral Self as a Precondition for Moral Responsibility



The central role of the concept self-hood for 
Ethical Studies

becomes apparent already in the first essay of the book, where the
solution to the deadlock in the debate about the nature of moral
responsibility is suggested by Bradley through a revision of the
standard philosophical views on the moral self. This fact has been
frequently overlooked in the secondary literature that tends to focus
on social and political implications of Bradley’s 
Ethical
Studies
 (cf., Brink 2003; MacIntyre 1966 [1998]; Bell 1984;
Wright 1984; Hudson 1980; Copleston 1966; Milne 1962; Sidgwick 1954;
Muirhead 1932). However, in the recent years, the centrality of this
concept for moral theory has been more and more acknowledged by
Bradley scholars (notably, Mander 2016; Irwin 2009; Wilson 1999;
Sprigge 1993; MacNiven 1987; Keene 1970), even though it is still
frequent that commentators (cf. Wilson 1999; Stanley 1996; Nicholson
1990; Sprigge 1984; Vander Veer 1970; Keene 1970; Wollheim 1969; Lewis
1969) tend to not draw sufficient distinction between the moral and
metaphysical accounts of the self. The lack of conceptual clarity in
this respect may cause problems for the interpretation of 
Ethical
Studies
. According to Bradley’s metaphysics—developed
much later than 
Ethical Studies
—the self is an
appearance (which does not imply that it does not exist; for more on
Bradley’s metaphysical account of the self see Pugmire 1996; De
Witt 1984; Vander Veer 1970). Despite that, in 
Ethical
Studies
 the self is treated as if it was real. The overall
message of the book is that, even though the self is just a mental
construct, without it, ethics and moral life are impossible. One
should not merely superimpose the metaphysical views of later Bradley
on his earlier moral philosophy; an elaborate analysis that would make
justice to the original idea of 
Ethical Studies
 as well as to
Bradley’s complex ontology and epistemology of 
Appearance
and Reality
 is required. One of the first to draw attention to
the apparent disagreement between 
Ethical Studies
 and

Appearance and Reality
 on the topic of the self was Wollheim
(1969), who noted that if there is any context in Bradley’s
philosophy where we have to admit the existence of the self, it is his
moral philosophy. Wollheim, however, explains the apparent
inconsistency between earlier and later Bradley not with reference to
the conceptual difference between the normative domain of ethics and
descriptive domain of metaphysics, but to the inherent contradiction
in the metaphysical account of the self, thus, in the end, denying the
uniqueness of ethics as a philosophical field of inquiry. This is
common also to those researchers who ague for a naturalistic account
of the moral self in 
Ethical Studies
, either tracing it to
Hume and Hobbes (Basile 2003; Wilson 1999) or reducing it to a set of
habits—both of which interpretations find their disproof in some
place in 
Ethical Studies
.



In 
Ethical Studies
, Bradley begins his discussion of morality
and the moral agent with an analysis of the ordinary person’s
understanding of moral responsibility. The reason for this
starting-point is revealed much later, when he argues that a moral
agent begins with the development of self-consciousness. This, he
says, makes possible “imputation and responsibility, and here
begins the proper moral life of the self” (
Ethical
Studies
, Essay VII [1962: 299]). If an action has any moral
significance whatsoever then the person responsible (in the causal
sense) can be held accountable (responsible in the normative sense).
One could feel accountable, and with this goes a sense of liability to
censure or punishment. Being justifiably considered guilty and thereby
deserving of censure or punishment requires the satisfaction of three
conditions: (a) the person held accountable must be the same person as
the one who did the act, (b) the act must have been that
person’s, and (c) she must have had some understanding of the
moral quality of the act. While not in a position to provide a
philosophical opinion on questions concerning personal identity or
what constitutes an action, the ordinary person nevertheless
recognizes cases in which an accused person was “not
himself” or “did not mean to do it” or acted under
duress, and sees these as mitigating circumstances. In sum, the
ordinary person’s view, as Bradley presents it, is Aristotelian:
for the purposes of determining moral responsibility an act has to be
the agent’s in that its origin (
arche
) lies with or in
the agent in some sense—and the agent must not be acting under
coercion or in a state of non-culpable ignorance. These last
conditions reflect the common view that one cannot, in justice, hold
someone accountable unless she had a measure of control over the
situation and thereby could be viewed as acting on her own free
will.



If we turn to philosophical theories, we find differing opinions about
whether we enjoy this sort of freedom from external influences, and
Bradley is interested in how—what he calls—the theories of
Determinism and Indeterminism differ from the views of the ordinary
people; not because he thinks the ordinary people will always be
correct about such matters—indeed, they likely have not thought
much about such things—but because examining what the ordinary
people say about moral matters reveals the deep structures of a
society’s moral thinking as that is embedded in its language and
social institutions (or, in more modern terms, our moral
intuitions).



Concerning the free will debate, our moral intuition is at odds with
both theories. Contrary to determinism, our intuition tells us that we
can and often do initiate actions—and on this point Bradley
portrays the ordinary person as accepting the thesis now called
“agent causality”. What is omitted by the determinists are
explanations of behavior which appeal to the reasons of the agent,
thereby ignoring Aristotle’s notion of final causality, or
purposely reducing it to efficient causality. Thus, denying the
ability of the agent to act upon reasons, the determinist is denying
the autonomous nature of the moral self. The problem with
indeterminism, on the other hand, is its claim that 
nothing at
all
 determines our actions. This conflicts with our belief that
it often is possible (and sometimes even morally required to be able)
to predict what someone will do, because she has formed a certain
moral character and can be counted on to act a certain way when faced
with moral questions. In the end, Bradley shows that both theories
cannot make sense of responsibility and moral life because—even
though for different reasons—they fail to account for the
concepts of the moral self. This sets up the stage for the rest of the
book which will be occupied predominantly with the task of accounting
for this concept. The most important ethical question, from this point
of view, is about the kind of self that one should realize in her
moral life; it is this question that allows Bradley to introduce his
most crucial concept—that of moral life as

self-realization
, based on the idea of the moral self as a
creative, goal-oriented self-assertive process.



Self-realization is a complex term which, in the boarder sense, can be
seen as an attempt to translate the Kantian universalizability
principle into the concrete reality of a person’s life. The
universalizability principle says that if a moral obligation applies
to me as a moral agent, then it applies to any other moral agent in
the same manner, or as Bradley puts it:





That does not mean that everybody does or has to do what I do, but it
means that, if they were I, they must do as I have to do, or else be
immoral. (
Ethical Studies
, Essay VI [1962: 230])





As a principle guiding actions, it presupposes the distinction between
the moral self and my moral self: when the agent reflects upon her
beliefs, desires, commitments, and actions from the moral point of
view, she is reflecting upon her moral self. It is the object and
subject of moral evaluation; the bearer of responsibility and object
of blame and praise. My moral self is subject to change: with time, I
may become a better or worse person than I am now. My moral self is
not the same as your moral self, because the specific details of our
lives and circumstances, in which we make decisions and act, are
different. However, the reasons for which my moral self and your moral
self can be both seen as moral selves are the same. The moral self is
the other side of the universalizability principle—that
“me” to which any moral obligation applies to, regardless
of any specific circumstances of one’s life. In Bradley’s
own words:





I call my act the realization of the universal will because another
man in my case … must have acted as I did and would have been
commanded to do so. (“Miscellaneous Notes [c. 1874–5]”, Bradley 1999:
Vol. 1, p. 244)





And further:





The moral consciousness thus assumes its identity in all men.
[…] The superior will … commands individual acts which
are ends without distinction of person if “person” means
the private self. (“Miscellaneous Notes [c. 1874–5]”, Bradley 1999:
Vol.1, p. 245).





As such, the moral self is void of content. It is an abstract
principle. Bradley’s concept of self-realization is, in a sense,
a response to the question of how this abstract principle gets
specified and becomes a moral life of a concrete individual: how it is
possible for anyone to actually have a 
moral
 (as opposed to
empirical) self. The answer lies in the link between our actions and
what we are: as moral agents we cannot separate ourselves from how we
act. As MacNiven says: “in acting … we create
ourselves” (MacNiven 1987: 50). Bradley pays a lot of attention
to the psychological machinery of moral action (including desires,
volition, conation, beliefs) with the goal of explaining this link,
and thus explaining how we create ourselves as moral agents through
actions. Sprigge interprets self-realization through another complex
and controversial term of a concrete-universal:





In his 
Ethical Studies
 Bradley takes his departure from the
presumed fact that every individual is struggling for some kind of
self realization, and that this is the basic driving force of the
attempt to live a morally good life. Such a life is not a means to
self realization, but one main form of self-realization. By self
realization Bradley seems to mean the giving some sort of overall
coherent pattern or structure to your life in which you can find
satisfaction, and such that all the details of your life are enjoyed
as particular elements in that total pattern. One could perhaps say
that it is life in the light of an accurate self image with which one
can be satisfied. (Sprigge 1988: 117)





Representing moral self as a concrete-universal is conveying the idea
of goal-orientedness and structuring of internal states throughout
one’s life. This idea is encapsulated by the term 
personal
projects
, which seems to be better situated for the
interpretation of Bradley’s idea of moral life as
self-realization, also because it allows translating the idealist
concept of a concrete-universal into the language of present day
debates in moral philosophy. Projects are major pursuits that have key
role in organizing and structuring an agent’s conduct over a
long period of time: projects “give shape and content”,
“guide our lives” (Betzler 2013), and essentially
contribute to its meaningfulness. Careers, hobbies, personal
relationships—all such endeavors that are devoted to a
significant cause and require a body of actions to pursue it, are
examples of personal projects. Bradley’s description of moral
life is well-suited for such account of personal projects: my moral
self is essentially a life-long endeavor that has two dimensions. The
one is reflective and normative dimension, where the agent forms an
idea of her ultimate moral end; the causes she is to realize and what
is required to achieve them. This is a continuous process of
reflection upon her beliefs, desires, and actions, as well as her
social roles and connections to others—the process that never
stops throughout one’s life. Though this process, the agent is
constantly updating and concretizing the ideal view of herself,
or—in Bradley’s terms—her ideal self. The other
dimension is the practical one, i.e., the dimension of action.
Identifying with her ideal self, the moral agent, is able to adjust
her psychological states (beliefs and desires), as well as to align
her commitments, decisions, and actions. When the agent acts in
accordance with her view of what she ought to be, from the ideal point
of view, she is realizing herself and becoming her true self.


4. Moral Relevance of Desires



For Bradley, what drives self-realization are our desires, and through
them, our volition. The central role of desire and other emotive
states for self-realization has been acknowledged by such Bradley
scholars as MacNiven (1987), Crossley (1989b), and Mander (2016,
2011). MacNiven shows that Bradley conceptualizes desire as a separate
state of mind, distinct from pain and pleasure. Crossley discusses
desire mostly in the context of the concepts of feeling and immediacy;
while Mander connects Bradley’s account to a more general
idealist views on desire. Bradley’s concept of will is, however,
less discussed in the secondary literature, but it is important to
note that Bradley understands will not as a special faculty but as an
idea that is being actualized. In Bradley’s own words, it is
“the self-realization of an idea with which the self is
identified” (1902b [CE II.476]) or, to put plainly, will is what
you are ready to do. This account of will, places special importance
on desire and emotive states through which ideas find their ways into
an agent’s decisions and actions.



Well before E. Anscombe (1957), Bradley described the difference
between desire and belief via the metaphor of the “direction of
fit” (Mander 2016; Brink 2003). In theoretical pursuit, Bradley
says, our goal is to understand the object; we want neither to remove
nor alter the world of sensuous fact, but we want to get at the truth
of it. The whole of science takes it for granted that the
“not-ourself” is really intelligible; it stands and falls
with this assumption. So long as our theory strikes on the mind as
strange and alien, so long do we say we have not found truth; we feel
the impulse to go beyond, we alter and alter our views, till we see
them as a consistent whole. But when it comes to action, our aim is
not, leaving the given as it is, to find the truth of it; but
“in practice … we want to force the sensuous fact to
correspond to the truth of ourselves” (
Ethical Studies
,
Essay II [1962: 73])



This presents two very different kinds of intentional mental states.
In the case of empirical knowledge, we have a subject in the
psychological state of believing that something is true of the world;
her belief has a propositional object as its 
content
 as
Bradley would call it. Since the goal is to correctly understand the
world, the subject is committed to altering her belief set until it
accurately represents the external physical world. By contrast, when I
desire to become a better person I must first have represented the
self or person I wish to be under some description. This sort of
mental state also has a propositional object; e.g., in the statement,
“I wish that 
I were a more patient person
” the
italicized proposition following the “that” is the object
of the mental state we call wishing. What we have here, in
Bradley’s terminology is an 
ideal
 object which is the

content
 of the wish. This is ideal because it is a mental
representation of a state of affairs that does not exist at the point
the wish is made.



An ideal object can represent a possible different state of the person
contemplating it, which presupposes, in addition to the ability to
represent possible future states, a degree of self-awareness. An
example of this sort of self-consciousness is found in the addict who
may be very aware of how his desires are ruining his life. Once this
sort of self-reflective awareness is achieved it is then possible to
think of changing things. In Bradley’s language this addict has
pictured a better self that he might be, and if he comes to identify
his satisfaction with realizing this better self there is a
possibility of change. This situation sets up a conflict between the
actual person the addict now is and the represented better person he
wishes to be and this generates disharmony or what Bradley often calls
a “felt contradiction”. The pain of this conflict moves
the individual toward resolving it. It is important to note that the
addict cannot move forward without having a determinate ideal object,
a definite conception of the ideal self being represented. Without
this, identifying his satisfaction with realizing that state would be
impossible. Bradley writes:





The essence of desire for an object would thus be the feeling of our
affirmation in the idea of something not ourself, felt against the
feeling of ourself as, without the object, void and negated ; and it
is the tension of this relation which produces motion. (
Ethical
Studies
, Essay II [1962: 68]; compare to Bradley 1888: 17–18)





The introduction of the psychological tension into the explanation of
desire could give the impression that Bradley is subscribing to the
dispositional account of desire (cf., e.g., MacNiven 1987), according
to which desire is a disposition to action, i.e., “trying to
get” something or a “movement towards a thing”
(Anscombe 1957). What is more likely, however, is that the reference
to the feeling of tension is a way to describe the emotive component
in the motivation by ideas. This fits well Bradley seemingly
paradoxical claim that “nothing is desired except that which is
identified with ourselves, and we can aim at nothing, except so far as
we aim at ourselves in it” (
Ethical Studies
, Essay II
[1962: 68]). This quote should not be understood as a trivial
narcissism or an egoistic claim that I only desire the state of affair
which is in my interests. Neither should this quote should be
understood as a claim that the object of desire is always a belief.
Bradley rejects such view because it can be applied to the mental
states that are not, in fact, objects of desire—thus this view
fails account for desires as distinct mental states: “All my
ends are my thoughts, but all my thoughts are not my ends”
(
Ethical Studies
, Essay II [1962: 67]). As Bradley notes, the
fact that I can see a locomotive starting to move off the station does
not imply that I desire the train to move.



What seems to be a most likely explanation of what Bradley had in mind
when claiming that self is the only object of desire is expressed by
another idealist, J. H. Muirhead. He wrote that the propositional
content of desire contains a predicate of the desired self:





[I]t is indifferent whether we say […] I desire that object, or
I desire myself to be in possession of that object. (Muirhead 1892:
52)





In the same manner, Bradley aims to say that desire is always a desire
for a certain (future) state of myself; more broadly, the
agent’s desires represent her ideal of her self. The claim that
the self is the only thing she is able to desire, suggests that all
desires are somehow connected to her personal aspirations and
commitments. It is worth noting that such interpretation does not
exclude other-regarding desires, i.e., desires for the well-being of
other people. Other-regarding desires can also be a part of personal
commitments, as long as one can explicate a connection between the
object of desire and the future state of the agent’s self. If
Sally desires for her children’s well being, this may mean, for
example, that she aspires to be a happy parent whose children are well
off in life.



Another helpful concept is J. S. Mackenzie’s idea of desire as
the expression of one’s “point of view”,
representative of a person’s character (Mackenzie 1901).
Mackenzie’s “point of view” resembles
Bradley’s concept of the “whole of ends”
(
Ethical Studies
, Essay II [1962: 70]) which Mander (2016)
interprets in terms of “ideal desire-sets”—the unity
of life goals that personal projects provide. This implies a strong
connection between the object of desire and the desirer’s life
projects—or, as W. Mander puts it: when desiring an object





our very identity becomes bound up with it […] making its
realization a realization of our own self. Our identity lies in the
realization of our goals. (Mander 2011: 185)





To put it otherwise, desires are the driving force behind
self-realization: the only thing we aim at in acting is to realize
ourselves—or, better, the structure of practical reasoning and
the facts of moral psychology make it impossible that we could aim at
anything else. This means that our choices and actions constitute what
we are, and they do so by revealing what we identify with. You cannot
escape self-realization, but you can choose and control what person
you will become as a result.



With this Bradley puts forward an interesting alternative to the
dispositional account of desire, namely, a view that desire is the
identification of the self with the object. One aspect of this
identification can be explained with the help of a narrative view of
desire, according to which desire is essentially a story that the
agent tells herself about the attractive properties of the object and
as such, it reveals what an agent considers to be valuable (Airaksinen
2012). Bradley calls the realized desire is an “utterance”
of the self, or further says that the self feels
“asserted” and “affirmed” in the object of
desire (
Ethical Studies
, Essays I & II [1962: 33, 35,
68]). In other words, desires that have led to actions reflect the
agent’s value preferences and as such can be seen as narratives
about the characteristics that the agents finds attractive. The
psychological tension, which Bradley describes as a part of desire, is
then the agent’s feeling of contradiction between her idea of
her own future state, where she is has already become qualified in
this attractive way, and the her idea that her current state is not
thus qualified. In a sense, the object of desire stands for the idea
of something that agents considers to be valuable, making the desire
itself stand for acceptance of such value for the agent.


5. Integrity



Volitional choice therefore has a built-in normative feature in the
form of an idea of a better state or self. But self-realization means
more than this for ethical theory, for it purportedly represents the
over-arching, ultimate goal of moral action, which entails some idea
of a perfect, ideal self that is being aimed at. But here is a
problem: how can anyone ensure that one is true to one’s
ideal?



Answering this is crucial for Bradley’s ethical theory not to
fall victim to a criticism he made of Mill’s thesis about the
qualities of pleasures (
Utilitarianism
, Chapter 2). Bradley
leveled a barrage of criticisms against any theory, utilitarian or
otherwise, that imply that the moral moral self is the most satisfied
self and that satisfaction is the sign of being true to the moral
ideal. The central objection was that since pleasures are a
“perishing series”, with each one passing away once it has
been experienced, it is not possible to accumulate a sum of pleasures,
and since there are always more pleasures available than anyone has
experienced, Mill’s moral goal of maximizing pleasant states was
meaningless. But introducing the idea of qualitatively different kinds
of pleasures that can be ranked suggests that perhaps the hedonist
can, after all, successfully articulate the self we should be aiming
at. Perhaps the best self—the ideal moral self—is the one
that pursues the highest type of pleasure.



In evaluating this Bradley stresses the relative, comparative nature
of terms such as “higher” and “lower”. The
opposite terms such as “superior” and
“inferior” invite us to ask, “in respect of what is

A
 higher than, or superior to, 
B
?” Bradley
insists that if I say Sally is superior to Joan I must first be
comparing them in terms of some characteristic they share—for
example, both are beautiful—and, second, I am positioning them
on a scale, which is conceived in terms of two determinate termini. We
can perhaps see the point here by imagining what happens when, having
said Sally is superior to Joan, we are next asked to rank Mary. If
Mary is judged superior (in beauty) to both, then she is being placed
between Sally and someone who is right at the top of the scale.
Mill’s account of superior pleasures fails because he never
explains what the scale is that is being used and so never explains
what the “highest” kind of pleasure is. Whether this
criticism survives scrutiny does not matter all that much as far as
the fate of hedonism is concerned, for Bradley’s attack on
qualitative hedonism is nothing short of thorough and he thinks there
is no convincing case Mill can make in support of it. For example,
Mill’s competent judges cannot say that this ranking just
“feels” right, for that is to confess that the talk of
ranking is meaningless since one could have just as well
“ranked” them differently. And the ranking cannot be made
in terms of Mary’s beauty, because that is the quality that
makes Mary a candidate for placement on the scale in the first place;
which leads Bradley to hold, as did most of Mill’s critics, that
unless the whole business really is nonsense, there must some
criterion other than pleasure being used and so Mill has given up
hedonism. These, and some other arguments are independent of the issue
about knowing the upper limit end of the scale of pleasures. That
issue is important, however, because it marks a problem
Bradley’s theory of self-realization should also have to face:
namely, that talk of a “superior” or “better”
or “more perfect” moral person would require an
explication of the upper limit of the scale these evaluations are
employing. This seems a reasonable demand, for even apart from the
question of whether judging something to be better than something else
entails knowing what is best, Bradley’s thesis is not just that
we try to become better with each choice and action, but that we want
to be the best possible, to be perfect moral agents.



Fortunately, Bradley has an answer. In 
Ethical Studies

Bradley tells us that as moral agents we should avoid “the life
of an oyster” and that we should look to produce a self that is
a concrete-universal whole in which all is related so as to render it
a system rather than a mere collection of random acts and
characteristics. In other words, this means two things. First,
self-realization is the matter of a meaningful life, that is directed
to a cause/s. Second, such causes—which for simplicity’s
sake can be understood as commitments—should, in the end, form a
non-contradictory narrative about ourselves. Aligning our desires and
actions with these commitments is a matter of integrity. A life of a
morally good person is that a perfect unity of
“homogeneity” and “specification” (
Ethical
Studies
, Essay II [1962: 74])—homogeneity in the sense of
each desire should be directed to something in some way fulfills a
commitment; specification in the sense of the commitment taking the
shape of an action in the world.



In a sense, in most cases there is such a unifying narrative in a life
of a person. To the extent that people consider the consequences of
their actions they demonstrate that they do not see their actions as
disconnected from other things they have done and might do, and they
subordinate some ends to wider goals. That is, ordinary people not
only display a degree of prudence in making choices but also recognize
that the value of some actions is that they are means to more
important goals. In fact, Bradley claims that most people act with
some “ideal of life”, or some idea of what would make them
perfectly happy, however vaguely expressed, and this orders their
lives, governing their choices and actions. In a word, normal lives of
mature adults are at least relatively systematic. Moreover, if a
person has become habituated to act in certain ways (i.e., has
developed a disposition to act thus and so), then her actions will
tend to be relatively consistent. In such cases, says Bradley, we are
dealing with a “standing will” and it explains why those
who know someone well can predict what this person will do with a
considerable degree of certainty and why that person feels pleased
that others know she can be counted on to act appropriately. Standing
desires are opposed to occurring desires (
Ethical Studies
,
Essay VII [1962: 283]). The latter is an appetite, and it is a
temporary identification of the self with an object, which appears
only in the presence of the object. The former is a “relatively
permanent” identification with the object which is present
regardless the presence of the object. Standing desire can take form
of an interest proper, if what the self permanently identifies with is
the object itself, or it can become lust, where the self is identified
with the pleasure from acquiring the object. Standing desires play
essential role in the realization of the personal project, allowing
for certain values motivate us for a long period of time. Standing
desires are not the only ones that bring unity into one’s
self-realization process. Habitual desires are a very powerful
mechanism. These are acquired through the repetitive identification of
oneself with a certain object (Babushkina 2022). Developing habits of
desire is a part of the habituation of the self (
Ethical
Studies
 Essay I [1962: 53–55], Essay VII [1962: 295–296])
which, according to Bradley, is at the core of a person’s
upbringing.



The problem with habitual desires, is that the self develops good
habits through the same process that it develops bad ones: through
repetition and choice patterns. Similarly, one can develop interest in
(or standing desires for) something that is morally good and for
something that is morally bad. That is to say that if the goal is
merely to achieve some unity of one’s self, there is no
quarantine that what one achieves is moral self-realization. So, the
challenge for Bradley’s account of self-realization as a moral
project is to explain how the agent achieves the right kind of unity.
Instead of giving an account of character traits that would be good in
themselves to pursue, Bradley appeals to the concept of the Moral
Ideal to tackle this challenge: the moral self-realization is achieved
through the identification of the self with the Moral Ideal.


6. Moral Ideal




The Moral Ideal
 is a difficult term to explain in
Bradley’s ethics, but not impossible if we take into account
that, from the metaphysical point of view, the moral ideal is a
concrete-universal. This implies that we are dealing not with an
abstract concept existing independently from real things, but with a
concept, embedded in things it represents. Concrete-universal is
always an instantiated concept; it cannot be described apart from the
instances that express it. This, in turn, means that the moral ideal
is not a phantasy or a plan in the head of a person, but an
instantiated unity of different elements of person’s life (incl.
her desires, beliefs, commitments, actions). This also means that
there is not much to say about the moral ideal apart from 
my

moral ideal or the ideal of my personhood, that is constructed based
on the elements of my life. The fact that moral ideal is a
concrete-universal, explains how a moral agent is able to achieve the
unity of her personally through moral self-realization.



The closest Bradley comes to the explanation of the Moral Ideal is
when giving a description of what he calls “the content of the
ideal self” (
Ethical Studies
, Essay V [1962: 219]).
Under this general expression, Bradley lists three categories of
commitments that are worth having, from the moral point of view
(Babushkina 2016). One category consists of commitments to other
people. These constitute moral obligations that we have due to various
relationships we are in and different types of social roles we play.
These commitments are referred to by Bradley as “my station and
its duties”. Another category of commitments that are worth
having are those that we have to humanity as such; commitments to
treating others in ways they deserve as human beings. Here we move
beyond mere social relationships between people, and to the obligation
to treat all humans is a certain way. The third and last group of
worthy commitments are those to truth (e.g., scientific inquiry) and
beauty (artistic endeavors)—these Bradley tags as a non-social
aspect of the ideal self. Each of these categories, in themselves, are
rather abstract; these are a result of an attempt to classify all
things that are worth striving for, and any aspiration can be a part
of the moral ideal as long as it is universalizable. And it is only
thorough my taking certain commitments upon myself (i.e., identifying
with the moral ideal), that I bring any concrete content into it.



Another important aspect of the moral ideal is its normative force. As
my moral ideal, it sets the standard of perfection. As such, it does
not prescribe the moral agent any specific actions, but it tells her
what she should be. Understanding which commitments are morally worth,
the person is able then to apply those to her unique life situation,
depending what relationships she is in, what social roles she has, and
what aspirations and interests drive her. These helps to form a
personalized moral ideal that will push forward her self-realization
project.


7. Moral Development



Of interest to developmental psychology (cf. MacNiven 1996) of
morality is Bradley’s account of the development of the moral
consciousness, that is based on the assumption that social context
provides the script for our desires and that children internalize
these scripts while playing them out. At an early stage of mental
life, the child will experience pleasure from some object—say an
apple—and transfers the pleasant sensation to the object, so
that it becomes part of the content of the apple, a part of what that
object means to the child, or, better, a part of what the child sees
in that object. The child generates an appetite for objects of this
sort and in the presence of an apple the child will have a mixed
reaction: a pleasant feeling because the object is seen as pleasant,
but a painful feeling because she is not in possession of, or
enjoying, the apple. This produces a felt
tension—“felt” because it is occurring at a
pre-cognitive level, before the child has beliefs about the object is
or able to make inferences about the object based on past experience.
This felt tension is desire and it moves the child to action, to try
to take physical possession of it. Bradley’s psychological
account differs from the hedonist’s in that whereas hedonism
holds that a particular pleasure is willed, Bradley claims that the
ideal object willed is a particular thing which has had a pleasant
quality transferred to it and thereby attributed to the thing itself.
Moreover, on Bradley’s account the will—once we get to the
stage of having a fully developed self capable of having a
will—is actually seeking the object willed because it represents
the satisfaction of the self following the process of identification.
However, at this stage we have at best a very primitive precursor of
the self and it can only be said to affirm itself. That is, it lacks
the developed consciousness necessary to representing ideal objects.
Moreover, the child at this stage lacks the higher-order consciousness
needed to see itself as realizing itself by attaining an ideal object
with which it has identified its satisfaction. At this early stage we
are only talking about appetite since the child desires the object
only when it is present; at a later stage the child will gain a sense
of these things as independent external objects that persist,

ceteris paribus
, and so can be desired in their absence.



The child also experiences other people and is eventually going to
recognize them as individuals with independent wills—i.e., as
others who have their own plans and projects and as selves attempting
to realize themselves through their actions, and who, because of these
facts, may oppose or confirm its own desires, oppose its will. Since
initially these others are going to be family members or care-givers
there will be a pre-conscious bond of affection between them and the
child. When the child acts in accord with the will of another,
pleasure results from the affirmation from that other person, while
opposition is experienced as painful because it negates the bond of
affection. This produces the felt tension similar to that which occurs
in the case of an inaccessible desired object: a tension between the
pleasure associated with the presence of the care-giver and the pain
of being without the approval of that person. The main point here is
that the child will tend to be good (i.e., fit in with the norms and
expectations of the caregivers) solely because not doing so is
painful, not because the child has, at this stage, any goal it is
trying to achieve by being good, nor even the ability to articulate
why it acts as it does. As Bradley says,





The child is taught to will a content which is universal and good, and
he learns to identify his will with it, so that he feels pleasure when
he feels himself in accord with it, uneasiness or pain when his will
is contrary thereto, and he feels that it is contrary. This is the
beginning of personal morality. (
Ethical Studies
, Essay V
[1962: 178])





As the child develops it learns the language of morality and thereby
the moral perspective embedded in it. In this process the child learns
the meaning of normative concepts and in doing so learns what they
mean to others in the shared linguistic community. In this way the
social community imparts a moral perspective. In fact, the community
introduces the child to two levels of moral reflection: it imparts
specific moral values and norms through its institutions and
practices, and; it provides the moral concepts that are necessary to
the task of conceiving of ways to improve society, in this way making
possible the move to the more comprehensive level of Ideal
Morality.



The above rehearsal glosses over several identifiable stages of moral
development set out in Bradley’s moral psychology. These details
can be ignored here, for the important point to note is that Bradley
attempts to supple a psychological account of moral development that
fills in the final part of his exposition of the theory of
self-realization by explaining how one comes to identify one’s
satisfaction with the achieving or realizing of particular moral ends.
It is also important to note the roles he assigns to pleasure and
pain. That these have a place in his moral theory indicates that the
ethical hedonists were not totally wrong about their importance, their
mistake being to think that promoting pleasure and diminishing pain
marks the ultimate goal of moral activity. By contrast, Bradley argues
that in acting morally we choose and will and act in terms of the idea
of a state of affairs which represents a superior self to be realized.
We feel pleasure at the thought of that self with which we have
identified because we feel affirmed by the thought of its realization.
We feel pain at the felt contradiction between this and our actual
self and pain at the thought of not being the superior self we
desire.



Bradley’s excursion into moral psychology represents an effort
to explain the process whereby one identifies one’s satisfaction
with a particular ideal object, which is an essential element in the
structure of volitional action. He traces the transitions from early
states of mental life through to the sort of consciousness exhibited
by a mature moral agent. From primitive appetites which involve a
precursor self that affirms itself through its desires we arrive at a
variety of types of actions and of objects of volition and different
relations between the self and the objects. Children move from the
simple desire to possess the object to the pleasure taken in the
approval of others, to self-conscious moral action. These stages also
reveal the development of feelings and emotions and an increasing
range of types of object that one might take pleasure in. In other
words, there is not only the fixation of desire on certain objects,
but also an extension of the individual’s range of interests and
these move out beyond desired objects to an interest in other people
and future events and so on.



An important feature of this developmental process is gaining
knowledge of good and bad and the capacity to will both. The need for
this arises, first, at the formal level of the structure of volitional
action, which entails the dualism of inferior and superior selves (or
conceptions of these). To get beyond formal necessary conditions to an
account of specific actions this formal structure has to be filled in
with some determinate content which explains what the nature of these
two selves is. At the level of social morality this may involve no
more than knowledge of what society demands of me—which I will
identify as the superior, good self I should be—alongside my
tendencies to go my own way which marks the bad self that opposes the
social norms. But there must be more than mere knowledge, for it is
also necessary, psychologically, that we actually feel the tension
produced by the conflicting tendencies to be both good and bad. It is
not simply that one fails to comprehend fully the nature of moral
action without this, but that we also cannot feel the contradictions
that will move us to action, and without action there is no morality.
Hence, the common notion that moral agents are often viewed as having
to expend a great deal of effort on the internal struggle between the
desire to be good and a propensity to do things known to be bad is
correct. In Bradley’s theory the ultimate moral end of
self-realization presents two pictures of the self, labels one of
these “superior” and sets the moral task as realizing that
superior self in the face of the actual, inferior self. In this way
moral conflicts are always internal struggles. In acting morally I aim
at realizing my good self, which I see as my true self. Yet I cannot
in good faith say that my bad self is not myself, with the result
that, as Bradley rather picturesquely puts it, “when I enter the
lists against it, it is at my own breast that I lay my lance in
rest” (
Ethical Studies
, Essay VII [1962: 277]). The
battle against bad tendencies never ends, making the process of
self-systematization a never-ending process. We can never fully
realize our moral ideal and become the perfect self we are striving to
be. But we can proximate it. As a result, self-realization is never
complete; it is as long and diverse as the life we live.


8. The Limits of Morality



It is not uncommon for secondary sources to assume that Bradley
equates moral, social, political, and religious domains; this
assumption leads to a lot of confusion concerning Bradley’s
beliefs. In most cases, such assumptions can be traced to exaggerated
presuppositions about Hegel’s influence on Bradley. Such
presuppositions apart, careful reading of 
Ethical Studies

reveals that Bradley makes a clear distinction between moral
consciousness and religion, on the one hand, and between moral, social
and political spheres, on the other.



Here are a few examples. Bradley finishes 
Ethical Studies

with a brief consideration of religious consciousness, saying that
“[m]orality issues in religion” (
Ethical Studies
,
Concluding Remarks [1962: 314]). It is not difficult to notice certain
Hegelian overtones in this claim, which may lead one to believe that
Bradley sees religion as a sort of “upgraded” morality.
However, one must note that by itself the statement that
“morality issues in religion” is not enough to point to
Bradley’s adoption of the dialectical move from the final part
of 
The Phenomenology of Spirit
 (Hegel 1807): the structure of

Ethical Studies
 does not follow Hegelian dialectics in any
consistent manner. What is more likely is that Bradley tries to
delineate the sphere of moral practice (i.e., actions and their
motivation) and show its difference from the sphere of religious
practice. Bradley only discusses religion in the chapter called
“Concluding Remarks”, placing it outside the main body of
the book. This shows that the discussion of religion lies beyond the
discussion of morality as such. And indeed, Bradley explains his
choice by saying: “[a]nd here we should close these Essays,
since here we go beyond morality” (
Ethical Studies
,
Concluding Remarks [1962: 313]).



Bradley further elaborates this distinction: thinking in moral terms
presupposes a belief in the fundamental gap between reality and the
desirable/ideal. Once this gap is bridged there is no more need for
morality (in this Bradley comes close to Kant). To the extent that
people have both a “good” and a “bad” self,
they are a “self-contradiction”, and if these are
necessary to morality as Bradley’s suggests they are then the
ultimate moral end of action—self-realization as an infinite
whole—cannot be achieved. As he puts it,





we are a self-contradiction: we never are what we feel we really are;
we really are what we know we are not; and if we became what we are,
we should scarcely be ourselves. (
Ethical Studies
, Essay VI
[1962: 234])





Morality really seeks its own demise for were the ideal self realized
there would be nothing that remains to be actualized, at which point
morality is at an end. “Morality aims at the cessation of that
which makes it possible” (
Ethical Studies
, Essay VI
[1962: 234]). In the moral sphere, the opposition between what is real
and what is ideal can never be overcome. Once they merge, it is no
longer the sphere of morality. Moral actions aim to change reality to
meet the ideal; while moral evaluations (in terms of right/wrong,
good/bad) estimate how well we manage to change the word to become
ideal. An agent is motivated morally as long as she believes that the
ideal world does not yet exist (and hence the need to bring it about
through actions); if the agent believes that the ideal world is
already real in some way (e.g., through God), she is no longer
motivated morally but religiously. The sphere of religious practice,
for Bradley, is characterized by this belief that what ought to be
already exists in the Absolute.



The tendency to read the identification of social/political and moral
into 
Ethical Studies
 can also be traced to the conviction
that Bradley’s ethical theory is an updated version of
Hegel’s social morality, and from the persisting belief that
Bradley identifies the moral self with one’s station, and moral
obligation with social requirements. This approach, however, overlooks
most of Bradley’s arguments against Hegelian-style bottom-up
identification of the real and the ideal, put forth in Essay V
(Babushkina 2019). In contrast to Hegel, Bradley believes that moral
personhood cannot be reduced to the social:





the moral man can to a certain extent distinguish his moral essence
from his particular function … the content of the ideal self
does not fall wholly within any community, is in short 
not

merely the ideal of a perfect social being. (
Ethical Studies
,
Essay V [1962: 205])





The core of Bradley’s argument is the claim that we cannot
conclude anything about the moral character of the person solely from
the diligence with which she performs what the society expects from
her: it is an open question whether the one who fulfills her
positional duties well is also morally good. We need an independent
reason to determine whether her following social orders in that
specific situation was a morally right thing to do; in the end, the
state may be in “a confused or rotten condition, so that right
and might do not always go together” (
Ethical Studies
,
Essay V [1962: 204]). We are not justified to reduce moral norms to
custom and law: “[a] man can not take his morality simply from
the moral world he is in” (
Ethical Studies
, Essay V
[1962: 204]). Moral goodness is “goodness not of any particular
time and country” (
Ethical Studies
, Essay V [1962:
205]) and it is incompatible with apparent cultural relativism of what
people happen to value.






Bibliography


Primary Literature




Appearance and Reality: A Metaphysical Essay
, Oxford:
Clarendon, 1893; second edition, 1897.
 [
Appearance and Reality
, second edition, available online
]


[CE] 
Collected Essays
, 2 volumes, Oxford: Clarendon
Press, 1935; reprinted 1968.
 [
Vol. 1 available online
;
 
Vol. 2 available online
]. Includes




1884, “Can a Man Sin against Knowledge?”,

Mind
 (original series), 9(34): 286–290; reprinted in CE
I.142–148. doi:10.1093/mind/os-IX.34.286


1888, “On Pleasure, Pain, Desire and Volition”,

Mind
 (original series), 13(49): 1–36; reprinted in CE
I.244–286. doi:10.1093/mind/os-XIII.49.1


1901, “Some Remarks on Conation”, 
Mind
,
10(40): 437–454; reprinted in CE II.387–407
doi:10.1093/mind/X.1.437


1902a, “On Mental Conflict and Imputation”,

Mind
, 11(43): 289–315; reprinted in CE
II.444–475. doi:10.1093/mind/XI.1.289


1902b, “The Definition of Will (I)”, 
Mind
,
11(44): 437–469; reprinted in CE II.476–514.
doi:10.1093/mind/XI.1.437


1903, “The Definition of Will (II)”, 
Mind
,
12(2): 145–176; reprinted in CE II.515–551.
doi:10.1093/mind/XII.2.145


1904, “The Definition of Will (III)”, 
Mind
,
13(1): 1–37; reprinted in CE II.552–594.
doi:10.1093/mind/XIII.1.1


unpublished, “On the Treatment of Sexual Detail in
Literature”, in CE II.618–626.


 


Ethical Studies
, Oxford: Clarendon, 1876; second edition
revised, 1927; paperback second edition, with a new introduction by
Richard Wollheim, 1962.
 [
Ethical Studies
, second edition, available online
]


Ethical Studies: Selected Essays
, Ralph G. Ross (ed.),
Indianapolis, IN: Bobbs-Merrill, 1951. (Note: This volume omits Essays
I, VI, VII.]


The Collected Works of F.H. Bradley
, 12 volumes, Carol A.
Keene and W. J. Mander (eds), Bristol: Thoemmes, 1999. [Volumes 1–5
include previously unpublished materials from Bradley’s
archives, while volumes 6–12 are reprinted works.]




Secondary Literature




Airaksinen, Timo, 2012, “Desire and Happiness”,

Homo Oeconomicus
, 29(3): 393–412.


Anscombe, G.E.M., 1957, 
Intention
, Oxford: Basil
Blackwell.


Babushkina, Dina, 2014, “Bradley, Desire and the
Self”, 
Homo Oeconomicus
, 31(4): 533–547.


–––, 2016, “F.H. Bradley’s
Conception of the Moral Self: A New Reading”, in 
British
Idealism and the Concept of the Self
, W. J. Mander and Stamatoula
Panagakou (eds), London: Palgrave Macmillan, 67–87.
doi:10.1057/978-1-137-46671-6_4


–––, 2018a, “Grand Desires and F.H.
Bradley’s Views on Moral Life”, 
Collingwood and
British Idealism Studies
, 24(1): 41–69.


–––, 2018b, “On Moral Beliefs, Emotions,
and Motivational Wholes: F. H. Bradley’s Account of Moral
Motivation”, 
History of Philosophy Quarterly
, 35(2):
179–197. doi:10.2307/48563629


–––, 2019, “Bradley’s ‘My
Station and Its Duties’ and Its Moral (in)Significance”,

Zeitschrift für Ethik und Moralphilosophie
, 2(2):
195–211. doi:10.1007/s42048-019-00049-0


–––, 2022, “The Dispositional Account of
Habits and Explanation of Moral Action in F.H. Bradley”, in

Habit and the History of Philosophy
, Jeremy Dunham and
Komarine Romdenh-Romluc (eds.), 1st edition, London: Routledge,
121–133 (ch. 9.)


Banchetti, Marina Paola, 1992, “My Station and Its
Duties”:, 
Idealistic Studies
, 22(1): 11–27.
doi:10.5840/idstudies199222115


Basile, Pierfrancesco, 2003, “Self and World: The Radical
Empiricism of Hume, Bradley and James”, 
Bradley
Studies
, 9(2): 93–100. doi:10.5840/bradley2003928


Bell, David, 1984, “The Insufficiency of Ethics”, in
Manser and Stock 1984: 53–76.


Betzler, Monika, 2013, “The Normative Significance of
Personal Projects”, in 
Autonomy and the Self
, Michael
Kühler and Nadja Jelinek (eds), Dordrecht: Springer,
101–126. doi:10.1007/978-94-007-4789-0_5


Bradley, James, 1996, “Process and Historical Crisis in F.H.
Bradley’s Ethics of Feeling”, in MacEwen 1996: 53–90
(ch. 3).


Brink, David O., 2003, 
Perfectionism and the Common Good:
Themes in the Philosophy of T.H. Green
, (Lines of Thought),
Oxford: Clarendon Press.


Candlish, Stewart, 1978, “Bradley on My Station and Its
Duties”, 
Australasian Journal of Philosophy
, 56(2):
155–170. doi:10.1080/00048407812341161


Copleston, Frederick C., 1966, 
A History of Philosophy, Volume
VIII: Bentham to Russell
, London: Burns & Oates Ltd.


Crossley, David J., 1977, “Self-Realization As Perfection In
Bradley’s Ethical Studies”, 
Idealistic Studies
,
7(3): 199–220. doi:10.5840/idstudies19777314


–––, 1989a, “Bradley on the Absolute
Rights of the State over the Individual”, in 
Éthique
et Droits Fondamentaux/Ethics and Basic Rights
, Guy Lafrance
(ed.), Ottawa: Presses de l’Université d’Ottawa,
138–144.


–––, 1989b, “Feeling In Bradley’s
Ethical Studies”, 
Idealistic Studies
, 19(1):
43–61. doi:10.5840/idstudies19891914


–––, 2000, “Early Criticisms of
Mill’s Qualitative Hedonism”, 
Bradley Studies
,
6(2): 137–175. doi:10.5840/bradley20006210


Daly, C.H., 1963, “F. H. Bradley’s Idealist
Ethics”, 
Irish Theological Quarterly
, 30(1):
3–22. doi:10.1177/002114006303000101


De Witt, David Ray, 1984, “Bradley’s Theory of the
Self”, Ph.D. Thesis, New Orleans: Tulane University.


Green, Thomas Hill, 1883, 
Prolegomena to Ethics
, Andrew
Cecil Bradley (ed.), Oxford: Clarendon Press, published
posthumously.


Hegel, Georg Wilhelm Friedrich, 1807 [1977],

Phänomenologie des Geistes
, Bamberg und Würzburg:
Goebbardt. Translated as 
Phenomenology of Spirit
, Arnold V.
Miller (trans.), Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1977.


Hudson, W.D., 1980, 
A Century of Moral Philosophy
,
Guildford and London: Lutterworth Press.


Hurka, Thomas, 1993, 
Perfectionism
, (Oxford Ethics
Series), New York: Oxford University Press.


Lewis, H.D., 1969, 
The Elusive Mind
, London: George Allen
and Unwin.


Ilodigwe, Damian, 2004, “Bradley, 
Ethical Studies
,
and Dialectic: Self-Realisation and Its Equivocations”,

Bradley Studies
, 10(1): 65–87.
doi:10.5840/bradley2004101/26


Irwin, Terence, 2009, “Bradley”, in 
The
Development of Ethics
, New York: Oxford University Press, volume
3, 536–580.


Keene, Carol Ann Mary, 1970, “F. H. Bradley’s Theory
of Self”, Ph.D. Thesis, Saint Louis: Saint Louis
University.


–––, 2009, “The Interplay of
Bradley’s Social and Moral Philosophy”, in William Sweet
(ed.), 
The Moral, Social and Political Philosophy of the British
Idealists
, Exeter and Charlottesville: Imprint Press,
87–110.


Krook, Dorothea, 1959, 
Three Traditions of Moral Thought
,
Cambridge:: Cambridge University Press.


MacIntyre, Alasdair C., 1966 [1998], 
A Short History of
Ethics
, (Fields of Philosophy), New York: Macmillan. Second
edition as 
A Short History of Ethics: A History of Moral
Philosophy from the Homeric Age to the Twentieth Century
, London:
Routledge.
 


Mackenzie, John S., 1901, 
A Manual of Ethics
, fourth
edition revised and enlarged, New York: Hinds & Noble, and London:
W. B. Clive, University Tutorial Press.


MacEwen, Philip (ed.), 1996, 
Ethics, Metaphysics and Religion
in the Thought of F. H. Bradley
, (Studies in the History of
Philosophy 42), Lewiston, NY: Edwin Mellen Press.


MacNiven, Don, 1984, “Bradley’s Critiques of
Utilitarian and Kantian Ethics”, 
Idealistic Studies
,
14(1): 67–83. doi:10.5840/idstudies198414114


–––, 1987, 
Bradley’s Moral
Psychology
, (Studies in the History of Philosophy 3), Lewiston,
NY: Edwin Mellen Press.


–––, 1996, “Metaphysics and Ethics in
Bradley’s Idealism”, in MacEwen 1996: 91–109 (ch.
4).


Mander, W. J., 2011, 
British Idealism: A History
,
Oxford/New York: Oxford University Press.
doi:10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199559299.001.0001


–––, 2013, “British Idealist
Ethics”, in 
The Oxford Handbook of the History of
Ethics
, Roger Crisp (ed.), Oxford: Oxford University Press,
564–580 (ch. 27).
doi:10.1093/oxfordhb/9780199545971.001.0001


–––, 2016, 
Idealist Ethics
, Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
doi:10.1093/acprof:oso/9780198748892.001.0001


Manser, Anthony Richards and Guy Stock (eds), 1984, 
The
Philosophy of F.H. Bradley
, Oxford: Clarendon Press.


Mill, John Stuart, 1863 [2001], 
Utilitarianism
, London:
Parker, Son & Bourn. Reprinted in 2001, with his 1868 speech on
Capital Punishment, Indianapolis: Hackett Pub.


Milne, A. J. M., 1962, 
The Social Philosophy of English
Idealism
, London: Allen & Unwin.


Muirhead, J.H., 1892, 
The Elements of Ethics: An Introduction
to Moral Philosophy
, London: John Murray.


–––, 1932, “Francis Herbert
Bradley”, in 
The Great Victorians
, H.J. Massingham and
Hugh Massingham (eds), London: Nicholson and Watson, 
33–46.


Nicholson, Peter P., 1990, 
The Political Philosophy of the
British Idealists: Selected Studies
, Cambridge, New York:
Cambridge University Press.


Norman, Richard, 1983, 
The Moral Philosophers: An Introduction
to Ethics
, Oxford: Clarendon Press.


Pugmire, David, 1996, “Some Self: F.H.Bradley on the Self as
‘Mere’ Feeling”, 
Bradley Studies
, 2(1):
24–32. doi:10.5840/bradley19962111


Rashdall, Hastings, 1907, 
The Theory of Good and Evil: A
Treatise on Moral Philosophy
, Oxford: The Clarendon Press.


Rescher, Nicholas, 1987, 
Ethical Idealism: An Inquiry into the
Nature and Function of Ideals
, Berkeley: University of
California Press.


Sabine, George H., 1915, “The Social Origin of Absolute
Idealism”, 
The Journal of Philosophy, Psychology and
Scientific Methods
, 12(7): 169–177.
doi:10.2307/2013244


Santayana George, 1933, 
Some Turns of Thought in Modern
Philosophy
, London: Cambridge University Press.


Sidgwick, Henry, 1874, 
The Methods of Ethics
, London:
Macmillan.


–––, 1876, “Review of 
Ethical
Studies
, by F. H. Bradley,” 
Mind
 (original series), 1(4):
545–549. doi:10.1093/mind/os-1.4.545


–––, 1954, 
Outlines of the History of
Ethics
, London: Macmillan; first edition, 1886.


Sprigge, T.L.S., 1984, “The Self and its World in Bradley
and Husserl”, in Manser and Stock 1984: 285–302.


–––, 1988, 
The Rational Foundations of
Ethics
, (The Problems of Philosophy), London/New York: Routledge
& Kegan Paul. doi:10.4324/9781003049333


–––, 1993, 
James and Bradley: American Truth
and British Reality
, La Salle, IL: Open Court.


Stanley, Maurice, 1996, “The Paradox of the
Individual”, 
Bradley Studies
, 2(1): 51–63.
doi:10.5840/bradley1996217


Stebbing, Lizzie Susan, 1948, 
Ideals and Illusions
, (The
Thinker’s Library 119), London: Watts.


Stern, Robert, 2013, “‘My Station and Its
Duties’: Social-Role Accounts of Obligation in Green and
Bradley”, in 
The Impact of Idealism, Volume 1: Philosophy
and Natural Sciences
, Karl Ameriks (ed.), Cambridge/New York:
Cambridge University Press, 299–322.
doi:10.1017/CBO9781139626675.013


–––, 2015, “Does Hegelian Ethics Rest on a
Mistake?”, in his 
Kantian Ethics: Value, Agency, and
Obligation
, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 157–170 (ch.
9). Reprinted in 
“I That Is We, We That Is I.”
Perspectives on Contemporary Hegel
, Italo Testa and Luigi Ruggiu
(eds), Leiden: Brill, 2016, 107–126 (ch. 6).
doi:10.1163/9789004322967_007


–––, 2017, “British Idealism”, in

The Cambridge History of Moral Philosophy
, Sacha Golob and
Jens Timmermann (eds), Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
535–548. doi:10.1017/9781139519267.042


Vander Veer, Garrett L., 1970, 
Bradley’s Metaphysics and
the Self
, New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.


Warnock, Mary, 1960, 
Ethics since 1900
, first edition,
London/New York: Oxford University Press.


Wilson, Fred, 1999, “The Significance for Psychology of
Bradley’s Humean View of the Self”, 
Bradley
Studies
, 5(1): 5–44. doi:10.5840/bradley1999512


Wollheim, Richard, 1969, 
F. H. Bradley
, Harmondsworth and
Baltimore: Penguin; fFirst published, 1959.


–––, 1993, 
The Mind and Its Depths
,
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.


Wright, Crispin, 1984, “The Moral Organism?”, in
Manser and Stock 1984: 77–97.




Bibliographical Material




Ingardia, Richard, 1991, 
Bradley: A Research
Bibliography
, (Bibliographies of Famous Philosophers), Bowling
Green, OH: Philosophy Documentation Center, Bowling Green State
University. Please note the volume contains occasional typos and
mistakes in the references, but to this date this is the most
comprehensive catalogue of literature on F.H. Bradley before 1991.









Academic Tools










How to cite this entry
.








Preview the PDF version of this entry
 at the
 
Friends of the SEP Society
.








Look up topics and thinkers related to this entry

 at the Internet Philosophy Ontology Project (InPhO).








Enhanced bibliography for this entry

at 
PhilPapers
, with links to its database.












Other Internet Resources




The Legacy of British Idealism
, webpage put together by Will Sweet (St. Francis Xavier University).


Collingwood and British Idealism Studies
 [A list of back issues of the journal; the articles themselves are behind a pay wall.] 








Related Entries




Aristotle, General Topics: ethics
 |
 
Bradley, Francis Herbert
 |
 
character, moral
 |
 
childhood, the philosophy of
 |
 
consequentialism
 |
 
ethics: deontological
 |
 
ethics: virtue
 |
 
free will
 |
 
Green, Thomas Hill
 |
 
hedonism
 |
 
Hegel, Georg Wilhelm Friedrich
 |
 
idealism
 |
 
intentionality
 |
 
Kant, Immanuel: moral philosophy
 |
 
Mill, John Stuart
 |
 
perfectionism, in moral and political philosophy
 |
 
Sidgwick, Henry










 






Copyright © 2024
 by



Dina Babushkina
<
d
.
babushkina
@
utwente
.
nl
>

David Crossley

    




 









  Open access to the SEP is made possible by a world-wide funding initiative.

  Please Read How You Can Help Support the Growth and Development of the Encyclopedia




 

