











 
 Entry Navigation 






Entry Contents


Bibliography


Academic Tools


Friends PDF Preview 


Author and Citation Info 
 


Back to Top 


























Giordano Bruno
First published Wed May 30, 2018; substantive revision Tue Mar 12, 2024





Giordano Bruno (1548–1600) was one of the most adventurous
thinkers of the Renaissance. Supremely confident in his intellectual
abilities, he ridiculed Aristotelianism, especially its contemporary
adherents. Copernicus’s heliocentric theory provided a starting
point for his exposition of what he called a “new
philosophy”. It disproved the axioms of Aristotelian natural
philosophy, notably the idea that sublunary elements occupied or
strove to return to their natural places, that is, the elemental
spheres, at the centre of the cosmos. Concomitantly, it disproved the
existence of a superlunary region composed entirely of incorruptible
aether circling the earth and hence disproved Aristotle’s
principal argument for supposing that the universe was finite. The
universe was infinite, animate and populated by numberless solar
systems. It was also eternal. As such, it exhibited all possibilities
at any given moment, and all parts of it assumed all possibilities
over time, thereby constituting a cognizable manifestation of a
timeless and absolute principle, God. In keeping with these ideas,
Bruno proposed versions of metempsychosis, polygenism, panpsychism
and, renouncing Christian emphases on human imperfection, advocated a
morality that exhorted individuals to perfect their intellectual
powers.










1. Life


2. The Wisdom of the Ancients


3. Cosmology: The Universe and the Atom


4. The Universal Soul, Universal Matter and Universal Intellect


5. The Universe as the Image of God


6. The Limitless Universe as the Expression of Divine Omnipotence


7. “The Hidden God”, His Procession, Nature as “God in Things”




7.1. Divine Transcendence and Immanence


7.2. Two Metaphysical Inconsistencies?






8. Panpsychism


9. The Individual Soul and Its Perfection


10. Religion


11. Bruno’s Afterlife


Bibliography




Abbreviations


Primary Literature




Works by Bruno


Documents relating to Bruno’s trial


Other primary sources






Secondary Literature




Studies cited in this entry and selected studies


Bibliographies


Additional Resources










Academic Tools


Other Internet Resources


Related Entries










1. Life



Filippo Bruno was born in January or February 1548, son of Giovanni
Bruno, a soldier of modest circumstances, and Fraulissa Savolina, at
Nola, about 13 miles north-east of Naples. At the unusually late age
of seventeen, beguiled perhaps by the prospect of a life dedicated to
learning, he entered the Dominican convent of San Domenico Maggiore in
Naples, assuming the name Giordano. In 1572 he became a priest and
later that year began to study theology formally, obtaining his
licence as a theologian in July 1575. That year he was investigated by
his Provincial for his heritical views, concerning among other things,
probably the Trinity (Firpo 2000, 125), a delicate topic in
Reformation Europe. This was not the first occasion on which he had
scandalized his fellow friars and, exasperated with the constraints of
the religious life, he fled the convent in early 1576. He went first
to Rome and then, taking off his habit, proceeded to northern Italy.
He was now a fugitive from his order and excommunicate. Over the next
fourteen or so years he moved from one town or city to another, first
in Italy and then in France, Switzerland, England, Germany and
Bohemia. In 1591 he returned, fatefully, to Venice. It was during
these unsettled years that Bruno composed the forty Italian and Latin
works of his that survive today, plus at least five others now
lost.



Without family, connections or means of his own, Bruno relied on his
wits. At Noli, a small coastal town situated between Nice and Genoa,
he taught Latin to schoolboys and elementary astronomy to
“certain gentlemen” (Firpo 2000: 45). In Geneva, he worked
in a printer’s shop, correcting proofs. He aspired to greater
things. His goal was to teach philosophy without the trammels of
revealed truths, preferably at a university. On several occasions, a
position of this kind seemed within his grasp. Two factors, however,
conspired to thwart his ambitions. The first was the unsettled
circumstances of Reformation Europe. At Toulouse, for instance, he
taught philosophy at the university for nearly two years
(1579–81), but renewed conflict between Catholics and Huguenots
in the summer of 1581 forced him to leave the city. His notoriety
further complicated matters. In a dispatch dated 28 March 1583, the
English ambassador in Paris, Henry Cobham, alerted Queen
Elizabeth’s principal secretary, Francis Walsingham, to
Bruno’s impending arrival: “Doctor Jordano Bruno Nolano, a
professor in philosophy, intendeth to pass into England; whose
religion I cannot commend” (Aquilecchia 1995: 22, 24). Not by
chance does Bruno have the distinction of being the only known
sixteenth-century philosopher to have been excommunicated from all
three major confessions: Roman Catholic (Naples, 1576), Calvinist
(Geneva, 1579) and Lutheran (Helmstedt, 1589). The second factor was
his temperament. Intolerant of those whom he deemed fools, Bruno
repeatedly caused offence. In 
The Ash Wednesday Supper
, the
first and best known of the six philosophical dialogues in Italian
published while he was living in London, he decried the ignorance and
pomposity of English men of learning and cast aspersions on the London
commoner. He compared himself, “a Neapolitan born and bred under
a more benign sky”, with a hapless antagonist at Oxford
University, whom he described as a discourteous “pig” (BOI
I, 535). Such was the offence that the work caused that he began his
next dialogue, 
On the Cause, the Principle and the One
 with
an elaborate apology in which he retracted his comments while
simultaneously justifying them. It was a ploy that he would use again,
ill-advisedly, during his trial.



Bruno’s wanderings came to an abrupt end shortly after he
returned to Italy in late August 1591. Following a brief stay in
Venice, he moved to Padua for three months or so and then returned to
Venice to take up lodgings with the Venetian patrician Giovanni
Mocenigo, to whom he divulged the “secrets” of his
mnemotechnics and philosophy (Firpo 2000, 19, doc. 7). Alarmed at some
of Bruno’s views, Mocenigo denounced him to the Venetian
Inquisition on 22 May 1592. Events took a decided turn for the worse
when, on 12 September that year, the Holy Office in Rome requested
Bruno’s extradition. The Venetian authorities dilly-dallied,
before acceding to the request in January 1593. At Rome, the trial
proceeded slowly. Eventually, on 14 January 1599, the Congregation of
the Holy Office approved a list (now lost) of eight heretical
propositions assembled by Robert Bellarmine, S.J., and Alberto
Tragagliolo, O.P., from the trial records and copies of Bruno’s
works. Bruno was invited to consider “whether he wished to
abjure the propositions as heretical” (Firpo 2000: 411, 413,
doc. 55). Four days later, he was brought before the Congregation and
ordered to abjure the propositions within six days. Bruno conceded,
with qualifications, and then submitted a written defence of his
views.



The trial proceeded, with Bruno abjuring the heresies of which he was
accused, while at the same time taking issue, in written depositions,
with aspects of the accusations. It was not, as mentioned above, the
first time that Bruno had used this ploy, turning concession into a
springboard for reasserting his position. On this occasion, however,
the stakes were higher, as he surely knew. On 21 December 1599, the
die was cast when he retorted to the Inquisitors that





he neither needed nor wished to recant, that he did not have anything
to recant, that he did not grounds for recanting, and did not know
about what he should recant. (Firpo 2000, clxxvi, 463, doc. 64)





The Congregation made a final attempt the same day, sending the
Dominican General and the Procurator, the two most senior members of
the order that he had deserted almost twenty-four years previously, to
plead with him, in vain. On 20 January 1600, the Congregation, with
Pope Clement VIII presiding, ordered that all of Bruno’s works
be placed on the Index of Prohibited Books and that he should be
consigned to the secular authorities of Rome for punishment as an
impenitent, pertinacious and obstinate heretic. Bruno’s final
written deposition, addressed to the pope, “was opened but not
read” (Firpo 2000: 471, 475, doc. 65a–b). At dawn on 17
February 1600, he was led out onto the Campo de’ Fiori. With a
metal plate clamped over his tongue, Bruno was stripped, tied to a
stake and, accompanied by the chants of the Confraternity of the
Beheading of St John, burned alive.


2. The Wisdom of the Ancients



Bruno’s philosophy—despite its inconsistent terminology,
intricacies, eclecticism and wilful contrariness—has an inner
coherence. Indeed, he can claim to be the first thinker since
antiquity to integrate a metaphysics, physics, psychology and ethics
into an original, if unsystematically presented, philosophy, one that
aspired to go beyond the re-elaborations of Platonism, Aristotelianism
or scepticism within a Christian context that had hitherto prevailed.
The outcome was a radical alternative to medieval and Renaissance
interpretations of human nature, the cosmos and God. His philosophy
remained, however, in one decisive respect a creation of the
Renaissance: neither celestial nor terrestrial mechanics were
reducible to mathematical abstractions. His treatment of
Copernicus’s heliocentric hypothesis, discussed in the following
section, exemplifies this approach.



The coherence stems from his interpretation of ancient learning. From,
principally, the fifteenth-century Christian Platonist Marsilio
Ficino, he learned of the gentile tradition of wisdom, the
“ancient philosophy”, that had allegedly originated with
sages such as Zoroaster in Persia and Hermes Trismegistus in Egypt.
Orpheus, Pythagoras and other early Greek thinkers had imbibed this
wisdom and transmitted it to Plato, among many others. Through innate
powers of mind, divine inspiration or direct or indirect knowledge of
Jewish lore, these sages and philosophers had acquired intimations of
many, indeed most, of the essential tenets of Christianity. Hence,
concluded Ficino, the study of ancient Greek philosophy, especially
Platonism, could rightfully serve as a handmaiden to the Christian
faith. Bruno denied any such notions of progress. Human knowledge,
like all natural things, observed the rule of vicissitude (see
 
Section 3
),
 gradually oscillating from one extreme to the other. Greek philosophy
from Plato onwards was a debased version of the true wisdom known to
ancient sages such as Hermes Trismegistus among the Egyptians and
Pythagoras, Parmenides and Empedocles among the early Greeks. The
task, then, was to restore an authentic ancient philosophy by
elaborating upon what could be discerned in the few surviving Egyptian
and Pythagorean records of it with the help of vestigial truths
preserved in Greek philosophy. Even Aristotle, “the stupidest of
all philosophers” (BOL I.3, 182), who had done his best to
“pervert the opinions of the ancients and oppose the
truth”, sometimes included, despite himself, valuable ideas
gleaned from his predecessors (BOI I, 557, 690, 730). The many other
philosophical sources that Bruno eclectically pressed into
service—Presocratic, Platonic, Aristotelian, Stoic, Epicurean,
medieval, Arabic, scholastic and Renaissance—served the same
purpose (BOI I, 690–691): the articulation of a philosophy true
to the principles of an ancient wisdom all but obliterated by
Aristotle and his followers.



His approach towards Scripture followed suit. Patristic, medieval and
Renaissance authors, including again Ficino, held that Hermes
Trismegistus had lived at the same time as or shortly after Moses.
This explained the many similarities between the Old Testament and
Hermes’s writings. Bruno reversed the chronology. He was not the
first Renaissance author to do so, but he was the first to draw out
the implications. The daughter of the Pharaoh had taken Moses into her
household as “her son” (Exodus 2:10, KJV), and he had
become “learned in all the wisdom of the Egyptians” (Acts
7:22, KJV; BOI II, 369). This “wisdom of the Egyptians”
was the wisdom recorded in Hermes’s works. In other words, the
Pentateuch, which was believed at the time to have been composed by
Moses, and hence Scripture as a whole were tributaries of Egyptian
lore, rather than vice versa. Bruno made this point circumspectly, as
well he might. Sometimes he disguised his interpretation by referring
to Scripture as the “Kabbalah”. Such wisdom, he declared,
as there was in the Kabbalah of the Jews “derived from the
Egyptians, by whom Moses was educated” (BOI II, 362, 369). Read
literally, this statement was uncontroversial. Though purportedly
Mosaic in origin, the Kabbalah was not an authoritative repository of
Christian doctrine. By “Kabbalah”, however, Bruno
surreptitiously meant Jewish lore as recorded not only in the
originally oral tradition of the Kabbalah, but also in the parallel
written tradition, that is, the Pentateuch, and hence in the Old and
New Testaments generally. The crucifixion was a “Kabbalistic
tragedy” (BOI II, 263).



Travesty though it therefore was for the most part, Holy Scripture,
like Plato’s and Aristotle’s philosophies, had inherited
some truths from pre-Mosaic wisdom. Bruno duly quoted from Scripture
on many occasions—examples feature in the following
sections—to support his metaphysical, cosmological and ethical
views. The Book of Job was especially valuable in this respect. Job
had lived in the Land of Uz and so recorded, not Jewish lore, but
“profound mysteries of the Chaldeans” (BOL I.2, 390, 418,
526), ones that, like the wisdom of the Egyptians, the Magi, Orphics
and Pythagoreans, constituted a strand of “the ancient
philosophy” (BOI I, 460). Chaldean wisdom, like that of the
Egyptians, owed nothing of value to the “Jewish Kabbala”,
which had been composed by a people, the “excrement” of
Egypt, who had never had a “handbreadth” of land to their
name (BOI II, 377). Whether these and other aspersions (see also BOI
II, 209, 365, 383, 438; and
 
Section 10
),
 stereotypical by his day, represent prejudices discredited by
objections voiced by other interlocutors in his dialogues or ones that
he, in fact, shared is a moot point. One way or the other, they served
to convey his conviction that what truths there were in Scripture
derived from a philosophical tradition that had originated in ancient
Egypt.



Medieval and Renaissance philosophers and theologians had,
disastrously, held the opposite view. Philosophically, they looked to
Plato, Aristotle and Averroes as authorities, rather than to Hermes,
the Chaldeans, Pythagoras and other early Greek sages. Exegetes had
consequently misinterpreted those parts of Scripture that touched on
philosophical matters, misreading literally passages that described
nature and the universe figuratively and vice versa (BOI I,
527–528). This did not dissuade Bruno from adopting traditional
ways of thinking when it suited him. He acknowledged the Dominican
Thomas Aquinas as a determining influence, praised the metaphysical
speculations of thirteenth-century Oxford Franciscans (e.g., Duns
Scotus), extolled Averroes as a better commentator on Aristotle than
any late Greek commentator, despite the Arab philosopher’s
ignorance of the Greek language. The Christian Trinity, perhaps
surprisingly, played a formative role in his metaphysics
 (
Section 7
).
 It was contemporary scholasticism that bore the brunt of
Bruno’s animosity, above all for its emphasis on Latin style at
the expense of intellectual substance—a vice contracted from
Renaissance humanism, for which he had no patience (BOI I,
671–676; BOL I.3, 236).


3. Cosmology: The Universe and the Atom



How and when Bruno began to develop what he called his “new
philosophy” is uncertain (Granada 1990, 346–349). His
earliest surviving philosophical work, 
On the Shadows of the
Ideas
, dated 1582, hints at a few of its positions, including
heliocentricism (BOL II.1, 7–8) and divine immanence
 (
Section 7
).
 The first detailed statement, however, came in 
The Ash Wednesday
Supper
, an Italian dialogue published at London in 1584, in which
he set out his interpretation of Copernicus’s heliocentric
hypothesis, as explained in 
On the Revolutions of the Heavenly
Orbs
 (1543). Dismissing contemporary claims that
Copernicus’s hypothesis was merely a convenient computational
device, Bruno announced that it disproved the traditional
Aristotelian-Ptolemaic picture of the cosmos. In the first place, it
disproved Aristotle’s doctrine that each sublunary element had a
fixed “natural place” at the centre of the
cosmos—the earth’s globe at the very centre, water in the
sphere immediately surrounding it, followed by the air and fire
spheres—and that particles of the elements, if displaced from
these natural spheres, had an intrinsic impulse to regain them. On the
contrary, since the earth, wrote Bruno, was a planet circling the sun,
the elemental spheres of which it was constituted were continuously in
motion. The elements did not have absolute “natural
places”; and an elemental part, whether displaced from a whole
or chancing to be near a whole, sought to attach itself to it because
a whole was the place where it would be best preserved. Once united
with a whole, elemental parts were no longer heavy or light and
revolved with it naturally, that is, without resistance. This doctrine
of gravity drew on Ficino’s Neoplatonic ideas of elemental
motion, Copernicus’s doctrine of gravity, Lucretius’s
comments on the weightlessness of parts in their wholes and scholastic
notions of self-conservation (Knox 2002).








Figure 1:
 Peter Apian,

Cosmographicus liber
 (1524, p. 6). The woodcut typifies the
medieval and Renaissance picture of the cosmos that Bruno sought to
discredit. At the centre lies the terraqueous globe, understood as a
combination of the earth and water spheres. Surrounding them are the
concentric spheres of the other two sublunary elements, air and fire.
Beyond the fire sphere is the superlunary region, which comprises: (a)
seven spheres, each of which carries a planet—the moon, Mercury,
Venus, the sun, Mars, Jupiter and Saturn—around the centre of
the cosmos; and (b) four outer spheres: the firmament (i.e., the
sphere of fixed stars), the crystalline sphere, the 
primum
mobile
 and the empyrean. Reproduced by permission of UCL Library,
Special Collections.





Commendable though his achievement had been, Copernicus had remained
unaware of the full implications of his heliocentric hypothesis. It
was left to Bruno, the philosopher, to accomplish the full revolution
of thought, to pass beyond the quantitative sensible realm that,
indispensable stepping stone though it was, had unduly preoccupied
mathematicians like Copernicus and to proceed to what could be
discerned by reason alone (BOI I, 448–454). Copernicus’s
most egregious shortcoming in this respect had been his failure to
recognize that his heliocentric hypothesis disproved Aristotelian and
scholastic arguments that the cosmos was finite and unique. If the
heavens were infinite, these arguments ran, then their outermost
regions would—impossibly—revolve infinitely fast around
the earth at centre of the cosmos. Nor could there be more than one
cosmos, because, if there were, then a displaced particle of an
element would—no less impossibly—have two or more natural
places to which it should return. These objections, Bruno inveighed,
carried no force in a heliocentric world. The apparent daily rotation
of a firmament or “sphere of fixed stars” around the earth
was an illusion created by the earth’s rotation around its axis
as it circled the sun. The universe was not a finite globe composed of
concentric spheres, “like an onion”, to use a simile
popular in his day (BOL I.2, 261), to use a common simile. Instead it
was an infinite, homogeneous expanse populated by an infinite number
of solar systems like our own. How far, he declared triumphantly, his
achievement surpassed that of Columbus, who had discovered just one
continent on one earth (BOI I, 451–452)! Lucretius, Nicholas of
Cusa (1401–64) and counterfactual scholastic discussions
concerning the plurality of worlds are evident influences. The
authority that Bruno particularly liked to invoke, however, was
Scripture. The infinite number of celestial bodies corresponded to
“those so many hundreds of thousands [of angels]”—an
allusion to Daniel 7:10—“that assist in the ministry and
contemplation of the first, universal, infinite and eternal efficient
cause” (BOI I, 455).



The celestial or, as Bruno called them, “principal” bodies
glided weightlessly within an infinite “receptacle” or
“expanse” of aether (BOI II, 61, 110) like specks of dust
in the sunlit air (BOL I.1, 262; I.2, 91). What made them move? Their
souls. They were animate and, as their orderly patterns of motion
attested, also intelligent. Aristotle had suggested this among other
possible explanations for celestial motion. Most patristic and
scholastic authors, anxious to discourage polytheism, had rejected the
idea. Ficino’s revival of Platonism, however, had given a new
lease of life to the idea that the celestial bodies were animate. True
to form, Bruno, though indebted to Ficino on this as on many other
scores, cited the Book of Job (28:20–21), interpreted
figuratively, as his authority (BOL I.1, 377). In each solar system
or, in Bruno’s terminology, “synod” the suns and
earths regulated their motions autonomously to their mutual advantage.
From the earths, the suns absorbed vaporous exhalations. In exchange
the suns produced the light and heat that the earths, as
“animals”, needed in order to host living things. No part
of them remained forever barren thanks to the several approximately
circular revolutions that they performed. Nature, for Bruno as for
Aristotle (
On the Heavens
, II.14, 271a33), did nothing in
vain (BOL III, 108).



In accordance with these ideas, Bruno populated the principal bodies
with life-forms of every kind. Each region of each principal body
comprised matter which, circumstances permitting, became a plant or
animal, even a rational one. This last category included human beings
and also demons, in other words, rational beings with rarefied bodies
made of pure aether or combinations of aether with air, water or
earth. The latter, to judge by the demons frequenting the elemental
regions of our globe, were generally, but by no means invariably, more
intelligent than human beings. Within the mountains were dim-witted
troglodytes jealously guarding the earth’s mineral veins (BOL
I.2, 61, 282; III, 431). Long-living but of feeble intelligence, they
had little commerce with human beings. Stone-throwing demons, another
species of earthy demon, of the sort described by the Byzantine author
Michael Psellus, had lairs in the vicinity of Nola and habitually
pelted those who passed nearby at night, as Bruno knew from personal
experience (BOL III, 431). Nymphs with predominantly aqueous bodies
lived secluded in grottoes (BOL I.2, 282; III, 181). The variety of
demonic life was such that it “far surpassed that of sensible
things” (BOL III, 427, 429). A comparable diversity was evident
among human beings, who differed in skin colour and stature from
region to region (BOL I.2, 282, 284). The differences reflected their
diverse habitats. When extinguished by a cataclysm of some kind, they
regenerated spontaneously (BOL I.2, 282), in the manner that Avicenna
and, if only as a philosophical possibility, some Christian authors
had described. The novelty in Bruno’s interpretation was the
idea that spontaneous generation accounted for the variety of life in
an infinite and infinitely varied universe rather than the survival of
a privileged species on this earth.



The principal bodies, human beings and demons were the three genera of
rational animal inhabiting the universe. In one significant respect,
however, principal bodies were unique. Like accomplished
musicians—here Bruno adapted an analogy used by Plotinus and
many others to illustrate how nature operated non-discursively
according to a final cause—they did not think rationally,
proceeding from one thought to the next as they executed their roles.
Their intellects dominated their animal bodies, enabling them to move
intuitively in accordance with the ends proper to them. Unlike human
beings, too, the celestial “animals” were eternal and
hence did not reproduce, grow or decay. Though corruptible
intrinsically, they were, as the Chaldeans and Plato had taught,
sustained by divine providence (for which, see
 
Section 9
).
 This is, at least, what Bruno tended to think even if he conceded,
uncharacteristically, that he was uncertain on this point (Granada
2000). In all other respects, the principal bodies were animals like
any other. Stones and other parts of our earth, for example, might
seem inanimate but, as parts of a principal body, they were, like the
bones, nails and hair of an animal, alive, if only vestigially. Like
animals, too, the principal bodies fed and excreted. They absorbed
stray particles from the surrounding aether and in compensation
emitted others, an idea inspired by Lucretius’s concept of

simulacra
 (
On the Nature of Things
,
IV.54–268).



This picture was incompatible with traditional doctrines of the
elements. Aristotelian, Neoplatonic and scholastic cosmology
distinguished neatly between the super- and sublunary regions. The
superlunary region and the celestial bodies within it were composed
entirely of aether. This “fifth element” or quintessence
was devoid of all change other than that of perfect, unending,
circular motion. The sublunary region comprised the remaining four
elements, fire, air, water and earth, which by nature observed finite
linear motion upwards or downwards. In addition to finite local
motion, bodies composed of the sublunary elements continuously
underwent generation and corruption. In these respects the superlunary
region was superior to the sublunary one. Indeed, even within the
sublunary region, according to many authors, the four elements were
organized hierarchically, with earth as the dullest and grossest
element at the centre of the cosmos and fire as the nimblest and
subtlest sublunary element, akin to the neighbouring celestial
region.



No such hierarchy obtained in a homogeneous universe populated by
animate suns and earths of the kind that Bruno imagined. Fire, air,
water and earth, as they were commonly conceived, were present in each
and every celestial body, indeed all four were present in each part of
every celestial body. Just as in a syllable, each letter was equally
significant—an Aristotelian analogy that Bruno turned to his own
purposes (BOL I.2, 118; Aristotle, 
Metaphysics
, VII.17,
1041b11–33)—so too were the elements in the composition of
a body. Timely support came from contemporary accounts of the 1572
supernova and theories about comets proposed by Tycho Brahe and others
(Tessicini 2007, 112–150). The birth of a new star proved that
generation did, after all, occur in the superlunary region. As for
comets, they were, as Aristotle and others held, composed of the same
elements as other sublunary things but they were not, as these
philosophers had concluded, sublunary phenomena peculiar to the air
and fire spheres. Their trajectories proved that were superlunary
objects or, more exactly, planets which, owing to the incline at which
they revolved around the sun, only intermittently reflected the
sun’s light towards the earth. The supposedly sublunary elements
therefore occurred in the superlunary region. In short, not only
reason but also observation disproved the notion of a cosmos divided
into two finite regions of contrasting properties (BOL I.1,
219–221). This was a vivid example of Bruno’s constant
refrain that his interpretation of the universe and of the things in
it (BOI I, 454; II, 35, 727; BOL I.2, 218–219; I.4, 31–32),
together with the metaphysical principles underlying it 
 (
Sections 5
–
8
),
 was based, not on faith (BOL I.4, 99–100; Firpo 2000, 57, doc.
11) or on the authority of previous philosophers (BOI, 494–495;
BOL II.2, 77–78), but the senses, regulated by reason.



Bruno’s alternative to traditional theories of the elements, in
its several articulations (Del Prete 2023), drew on Pythagoreanism,
ancient atomism, medieval discussions, pro and contra, of indivisible
minims and Nicholas of Cusa’s elemental doctrines (BOL III,
509–535; similarly BOL I.2, 463). Corporeal things comprised two
material principles, earth and water, and two immaterial ones, spirit
and soul. By “earth” Bruno meant the discrete, identical,
irreducible spheres of which physical things were made. He often
called them “atoms” to emphasize their indivisibility.
“The minimal body or atom was the substance of all things”
(BOL I.3, 140). “Apart from the minimum and indivisible, that
is, the atom and point, ... nothing truly exists” (BOL I.3, 23).
The circumferences and centres of these spherical atoms coincided.
Hence, as some medieval authors had proposed, atoms were dimensionless
bodies, unlike the atoms imagined by Democritus and other ancient
atomists. They were the principles of spatial contraction, of
solidity. Water, by contrast, was a continuum and, as such, the
principle of corporeal extension. Two or more atoms, though
dimensionless, bonded by water constituted a determinate body in
space, just as two or more dimensionless points, in Bruno’s
Pythagorean geometry, constituted a line. Observation confirmed this
theory. Dry, dusty, earth congealed with the addition of water.



The two non-material principles, spirit and soul, related to each
other analogously. Soul, the principle of motion, aggregated atoms and
thereby determined the identity of a body. Spirit—the

spiritus
 popularized by Ficino—was the incorporeal
medium through which soul connected with body. Soul accounted for the
existence of fire. In its purest form, fire was the combination of
water and light, which, as others, including Ficino, had argued, was
the physical analogue of the intellectual soul governing all things
(for soul and light, see further
 
Section 4
).
 This explained why flame resembled water flashing in sunlight: in the
former, soul predominated, in the latter, water. The Egyptians Hermes
Trismegistus and Moses corroborated this idea. Both had understood
fire to be essentially water (BOL I.1, 376; Genesis 1:6–7;
Hermes Trismegistus, 
Pimander
, I.5). Again, in Genesis
1:1–3 Moses had spoken of earth, the water (the
“abyss”), spirit and light but ignored fire and air,
precisely because they were not true elements. Air was a derivative
rather than, as usually believed, an element in its own right. Heat
generated by fire vaporized water to produce the air of the kind that
we breath, and this vaporous air merged seamlessly into the empty,
dimensionless, space beyond the atmosphere surrounding a celestial
body. This space was the aether, though not the aether of conventional
cosmology. It was the continuum spread throughout the universe and
through the corporeal things contained in it, binding them
together—not unlike the Stoic 
pneuma
 interpreted as

hexis
—without, however, moving them. It was, in other
words, 
spiritus
, the motionless immaterial medium through
which soul, the principle of motion, operated. As such,

spiritus
 or aether was the container—non-terminated
space—in which all things were located.



Bruno’s explanation of how bodies were composed disproved
outright the dominant Aristotelian view that the universe was finite
but infinitely divisible. It also disproved ancient atomism.
Democritus, Epicurus, Lucretius and others had, it is true, correctly
surmised that the universe was infinite and comprised an infinite
number of finite, indivisible, atoms. But their atoms were solids,
although imperceptible ones, of various shapes, weights and sizes
floating in a vacuum, a conclusion that led to a mechanistic view of
the universe, which Bruno did not countenance. Correctly understood,
atoms were incorporeal spheres with spatial locations. Soul, working
through the intermediary of aether or spirit, joined these
incorporeal, identical, spheres to make a body. Indeed, they were not
so much components as analogues of the universe. Intrinsically
dimensionless, their centres coincided with their circumferences.
Conversely, since the universe was an infinite, indivisible
(
atomus
) sphere, its centre was omnipresent. Both atoms and
the universe were absolute physical monads, indivisible unities, the
centres and circumferences of which coincided. They differed inasmuch
as the 
maximum
 was the “unfolding” of the

minimum
 and a 
minimum
 was the
“enfolding” of the 
maximum
.


4. The Universal Soul, Universal Matter and Universal Intellect



The soul that Bruno identified as one of the four principles of
corporeality was the World or Universal Soul. The universe was an
organism in which each principal body and the life sustained on it
participated in a common animating principle, in the same way as the
many parts of the human body were vivified by one and the same soul
(Knox 2013). Even supposedly inanimate things had a vestigial presence
of life. Rocks, for example, were alive to the same degree as the
bones or teeth of animals were. To make this point, Bruno borrowed an
analogy that Plotinus had used for the same purpose
(
Enneads
,VI.4.12). The Universal Soul was
“all-in-all”, that is, present wholly and indivisibly in
each and every thing to the degree that things were capable of
receiving it, just as a single voice, however great the audience, was
audible to everyone in a room diversely. Bruno, like others before
him, attributed the doctrine of “all-in-all”, in a
dematerialized version, to Anaxagoras. He also adduced several
scriptural witnesses, notably the Book of Wisdom (1:7), thereby
identifying the Universal Soul implicitly with the Holy Spirit:
“For the Spirit of the Lord filleth the world: and that which
containeth all things hath knowledge of the voice.” No matter
that the Council of Sens (1140) had anathematized this association
(Knox 2013; 2020c, 283–285).



The Universal Soul combined with Universal Matter to produce the
universe. The former was the active power, form, the latter its
passive subject. Bruno conceived Universal Matter as indeterminate
space (BOI I, 714–716, II, 16–17, 39, 59–60, BOL
I.1, 294; I.3, 24; I.4, 76), that is, the receptacle of Plato’s

Timaeus
 (52A–B) or more exactly Aristotle’s
interpretation of it (
Physics
, IV.2, 209b6–17; IV.6,
214a11–16). In this respect, it was the motionless aether or
spirit, devoid of any “specific quality” of its own (BOI
II, 159–160; BOL I.2 78–79), that served as the medium
through which soul acted on the two corporeal principles, water and
earth atoms
 (
Section 3
).
 Some philosophers, noted Bruno, called this space or container
“vacuum” (BOI II, 160–161). His inclusion of a third
cosmological constituent “Universal Intellect” complicated
this straightforward picture. Like the Neoplatonic Intellect, the
Universal Intellect comprised the Ideas (see further
 
Section 7
),
 understood, in cosmological contexts, as the immutable, intelligible
and generative principles of transient embodied things. The Ideas
elicited “images” or “vestiges” of themselves
in Universal Matter, that is “forms” of natural things,
which, unlike the Ideas themselves, were transient. The Universal
Intellect was inseparable from the Universal Soul. On one occasion
Bruno went so far as to describe it as the latter’s “inner
and most essential and characteristic faculty”. It operated from
within Universal Matter like “an internal craftsman” (BOI
I, 652–656; II, 182), articulating its effects through division:
a seed of a tree became a stem, from which grew branches, from which
grew twigs, from which grew buds and so on—to the point of
generating a new specimen through separation or discharge of some
kind. On other occasions, as discussed below
 (
Section 7.1
),
 Bruno described the Universal Soul and Universal Intellect as two
distinct but coexistent substances. Importantly, he did not conceive
of them in Neoplatonic procession, with the former as cause of the
latter
 (
Section 7.2
).



The Universal Intellect was separate from the corruptible things that
it engendered in that it was immutable. Spatial
language—“above”, “within”,
“separate” and so forth—was, as Bruno recognized,
inappropriate when describing intelligible realities. By definition,
something intelligible had no location or dimensions. To clarify what
he meant by the immanent and transcendent roles of the Universal Soul
and the Universal Intellect, Bruno appropriated a distinction
formulated in Thomas Aquinas’s 
On the Principles of
Nature
. Principles were constituents of something. The marble of
the statue and its form were constituents; hence, they were
principles, the marble being the material, the form the formal
principle. Causes, by contrast, were extrinsic. A sculptor was the
efficient cause of a statue, and he made it with an end, a final
cause, in mind. Neither the sculptor nor his purpose were constituents
of the finished piece. Analogously the Universal Soul and Universal
Matter were the two principles immanent in all things, whereas the
Universal Intellect was the efficient cause of all things and so
extrinsic to them. It also operated in accordance with a final and
therefore extrinsic cause: the perfection of the universe (Knox
2013).



The Stoics, as Bruno knew, had similarly proposed that the cosmos
comprised two mutually dependent principles, the World Soul or

pneuma
 and matter, active and passive respectively, with the
former accommodating Mind. Indeed, when introducing his account of the
Universal Soul and Universal Matter in his Italian dialogue, 
On
the Cause, the Principle and the One
 (1584), he included the
Stoics among the several schools and authors who had identified the
World Soul and matter as the active and passive principles of the
physical world. Stoic philosophy also contributed to Bruno’s
doctrine in surreptitious ways. In the 
Pimander
 (chaps
10–12) Hermes Trismegistus had declared that the cosmos was
composed of matter and soul and that the latter included Mind. Again,
Virgil (
Aeneid
, VI.724–727) had described the super-
and sublunary regions as animated from within by 
spiritus
,
which Bruno identified in this context with the Universal Soul, and
added that they were moved by a Mind diffused throughout their vast
mass. Hermes Trismegistus and Virgil were, according to received
wisdom, reporting the wisdom of the ancient Egyptians and the
Pythagoreans respectively. As such, Bruno considered them authorities
for his interpretation. Neither, however, was authentic. The comments
in the 
Pimander
 are just one of many Stoic borrowings that
reflect the eclectic intellectual ambient of Alexandrian Egypt in
which Hermetic works of this kind were composed. And unbeknown to
Bruno, Virgil’s lines drew on Stoic rather than Pythagorean
thought (Knox 2013). Renaissance authors such as Agrippa von
Nettesheim (
De occulta philosophia
 [
On Occult
Philosophy
], II.55), as Bruno knew, had interpreted
Virgil’s lines similarly.



Bruno’s two universal principles resembled Stoic doctrine in
another respect. For the Stoics, “first matter” was an
unqualified substance (
ousia
). For Bruno, too, Universal
Matter was a substance and, as such, was in act (
in actu
),
not a 
prope nihil
 (“almost nothing”) of the sort
imagined by Aristotle. The similarities, however, cease at this point.
For the Stoics, whatever existed, even soul and matter, was corporeal,
capable of acting on or being acted upon by another corporeal entity.
By contrast, neither of Bruno’s principles was corporeal. The
Universal Soul was an intelligible reality; and Universal Matter was
not corporeal in the Stoic sense. Inherently qualityless,
dimensionless, impassive and inactive, Universal Matter was a medium
that had the potentiality to become all things. To explain why
Universal Matter conceived in this manner was a substance, Bruno drew
on Thomas Aquinas’s commentary on Aristotle’s reportage of
ideas proposed by “ancient philosophers” (
Commentary
on Aristotle’s Physics
, II, 
lecture
 2, §149).
Wood was a substance in act because it was that from which a bed,
stool or image could be made, not because it was any one of those
things, and the same was true of Universal Matter. It was not so much
the effects elicited from Universal Matter by the Universal
Soul’s faculty, the Universal Intellect, which were in act, but
rather Universal Matter itself. It was a substance in act by virtue of
the unexplicated corporeal forms that the Universal
Intellect—or, more exactly, the Ideas constituting the Universal
Intellect—excited from within it (BOI I, 655, 715–716; BOL
I.2, 312; II.3, 96–97; III, 51, 694). Nicholas of Cusa supplied
the language of explication and implication.



Universal Matter was present in incorporeal as well as corporeal
things. It was the genus of two types of matter, corporeal and
intelligible. The former was the substrate of corporeal objects, as
described above. The latter, Plotinus’s version of Plato’s
Indefinite Dyad as reported by Aristotle, was instead the
substrate—the principle of indeterminacy or
potentiality—of intelligible realities. Bruno quoted two of
Plotinus’s arguments for the existence of intelligible matter.
First, the plurality of Ideas in the Intellect presupposed something
common to each of them, this commonality being intelligible matter.
Second, since the sensible world imitated the intelligible world and
the sensible world comprised matter, so too must the intelligible.
Plotinus, like other ancient Neoplatonists, considered the two matters
ontologically distinct, as Bruno noted. Intelligible matter, as the
matter of unchanging intelligible realities, did not change, Plotinus
had explained. It “possessed” all things simultaneously.
By contrast, the matter of sensible things possessed all things only
inasmuch as parts of it assumed all possible forms sequentially. Bruno
added a differentiation of his own, applying again Nicholas of
Cusa’s distinction between explication and implication:
intelligible matter was informed but unexplicated, sensible matter was
informed but explicated. All the same, Bruno insisted that corporeal
and intelligible matter were, ultimately, two species of the genus
Universal Matter. He was not the first to do so. The eleventh-century
Jewish philosopher, Ibn Gabirol or, in Latinized form, Avicebron, as
Bruno mentioned, had made the same move. Just as significantly, so too
had Ficino, in his adaptation of Augustine’s Plotinian exegesis
of Genesis 1:1–3, though Bruno, typically, did not mention a
Christian precedent of this kind. All distinctions, Bruno assevered,
presupposed something indefinite: potentiality, matter. Hence the
distinction between the two matters presupposed an absolute Universal
Matter. No doubt he knew of Thomas Aquinas’s objections.
Avicebron was wrong, Thomas had written, to say that species were the
actualization of a genus’s potentialities and so attribute
existence to what was a theoretical relationship between genus and
species (Knox 2013).



Like Avicebron, Bruno sometimes went as far as to elevate Universal
Matter above Universal Form. Nothing was “constant, fixed,
eternal and worthy of being esteemed a principle apart from
[Universal] Matter” (BOI I, 686). Form, that is, the Universal
Soul, was “under the constant control of [Universal]
Matter” (BOI I, 722). Its stability, which contrasted so
favourably with the flux of form, had led the heterodox scholastic
philosopher David of Dinant (d. c. 1217) “who had been poorly
understood by some” to call matter “divine” (BOI I,
601, 723; BOL III, 695–696). Divine though it might be, Bruno
did not identify Universal Matter with God. Indeed, he criticized
Avicebron, misrepresenting him on the by, for having held that matter
alone was “stable”, “eternal” and hence
“divine” and for vilifying all substantial form as
“corruptible” and ephemeral, and for not realizing that
the passive substance, matter, was formed not, impossibly, by itself,
but by an active substance, the World Soul (BOI I, 678–679, 687,
708).


5. The Universe as the Image of God



The universe, as the unity of these two substances, was “one
thing” (BOI I, 725) and “without parts” (BOI I,
726), a perfect whole to which nothing could be added and from which
nothing could be subtracted (BOI I, 725). Like a
“gastropod” sprouting and retracting its horns, elongating
and contracting its body, it was a single living mass continuously
changing its shape, while remaining essentially the same (BOL I.2,
313; cf. Spinoza, 
Ethics
, 2, lemma 7, scholium). To
substantiate this conclusion philosophically he adopted, true to his
commitment to restore an ancient wisdom, the monism of the three
supposed representatives of Eleatic philosophy: Xenophanes,
Xenophanes’s pupil Parmenides and the latter’s pupil,
Melissus (BOI I, 731–733; BOL I.1, 96–98, 253, 305; II.2,
180; III, 70, 457–458). The Eleatics’ “One
Being” (
ens unum
; Italian: 
l’ente
) was
the physical universe, not, as most classical, medieval and
Renaissance authors held, a metaphysical first principle or
supernatural God. It remained eternally unchanged, whereas all finite
corporeal things—ignoring the possibility that the
“principal bodies” endured eternally thanks to
providential intervention
 (
Section 3
)—were
 its transitory “accidents” or contingent “modes of
being” (BOI I, 604, 664–665, 728–733, 737; II, 125,
181–182). The One Being was, the Eleatics had also said (Knox
2020a, 96–98), “immobile” (BOI I, 731–732; BOL
I.1, 96–98), “the same throughout” and spherical
(BOI I, 607, 730–731; BOL I.1, 98, 305; III, 39). On account of
these attributes, they had concluded that the universe was an infinite
sphere, the circumference of which was nowhere and centre of which was
everywhere (BOL I.1, 291, 308; I.2, 342; I.3, 145). This formula,
cited by many before and after Bruno, derived from the second of the
twenty-four definitions of God set out in a twelfth-century
compilation, sometimes attributed to Hermes Trismegistus, known as

The Book of the XXIV Philosophers
 (Knox 2020a,
98–100).



Bruno appropriated other medieval or Renaissance definitions of God to
describe the universe. The infinite universe, he wrote, drawing on
Nicholas of Cusa’s explanation of how an infinite God related to
finite things, was a “coincidence of opposites” in which
hot and cold, attraction and repulsion, minimums and maximums and all
other distinctions concurred. To make the point, he drew on
Nicholas’s mathematical analogies, for example, the observation
that the circumference of an infinite circle coincided with an
infinite straight line tangential to it (BOI I, 738–744; BOL
I.1, 307; I.3, 147–148, 272–273). Given that he liked to
apply these and other definitions of God to the universe, should we
conclude that Bruno thought them equivalent? Would he have subscribed,
as often said, to phrases such as 
Deus sive natura

(“God or Nature”) and 
Natura, id est Deus

(“Nature, that is to say, God”). Not in any simple sense.
Unlike the universe, which, as the One Being, was defined in contrast
to its accidents, God was a “plenitude” without a
counterpart “non-being” (BOL III, 40). He was an
absolutely simple entity in which all differentiation, even those of
space, time and being and non-being, collapsed in a supreme
coincidence of opposites (BOL I.3, 144–147; I.4, 87; III,
39–41). The infinite universe was no more than “a second
god” (BOL I.1, 308), an “image” (BOI I, 693; BOL
I.1, 308), “an infinite likeness” of “an
inaccessible divine face” (BOI II, 43; cf. Exodus
33:20–23), a living, infinite, “mirror” of God (BOI
I, 547, II 46; BOL I.1, 203, 241, 308), a corporeal monad proceeding
from an intelligible monad (BOI II, 696). “From the One is a
similar One, nor could God’s image be otherwise in corporeal
form” (BOL I.1, 241–242, 308; BOI II, 42). God was not the
“form” of the universe but rather the “form of the
form … of the whole universe” (BOL II.2, 202). The
universe was the embodiment of God, so to speak, and thus worthy of
the reverence and awe that Christians, mistakenly as we shall see
 (
Section 10
),
 placed in Christ. Hence, Bruno, alluding both to Christian Scripture
(e.g., John I.14, I.18, III.16) and Plato’s 
Timaeus

(31B, 92C), called it the “image and only begotten nature”
of the first principle of all things (BOI I, 693; BOL I.1, 14; Knox
2020a, 87).



The sum of these considerations was that Bruno’s ontology had
three tiers in terms of immutability vis à vis change: (1) God,
understood as “superessential unity” (BOI II, 678), the
“superessential” cause of being (BOL II.3, 94–95)
and so beyond being, devoid of change; (2) the universe, the One
Being, devoid of change; and (3) the things contained in the Universe,
which, because they underwent change—or, in the case of the
“principal bodies”, were, as mentioned above, by nature
subject to change—were not, strictly speaking,
“beings” (BOL I, 732; II, 691–692. Hence, Bruno
chose the saying “There is no new thing under the sun”,
which he ascribed to both Solomon (Ecclesiastes, I.9–10, KJV)
and Pythagoras (Porphyry, 
Life of Pythagoras
, 19; Ovid,

Metamorphoses
, XV.252–258), as his motto (BOL I, 665;
Firpo 2000, CXLII–CXLIII, 620n). (In other contexts, it should
be noted, when not contrasting the universe ontologically to the
things contained in it, Bruno happily spoke of things having
“being”.) Alternatively, finessing the problem of the
principal bodies, Bruno defined these three tiers in terms of
corporeality and finitude: (1) God, incorporeal and infinite; (2) the
universe, corporeal and infinite; and (3) the principal bodies, which,
together with the individual things populating them, were corporeal
and finite (BOL I.1, 312; Knox 2020a).


6. The Limitless Universe as the Expression of Divine Omnipotence



The universe, limitless in extent and time, was the expression or
image of God’s limitless power. To make this point, Bruno
repurposed conventional ideas of act and potentiality
(
potentia
: translatable also as “potential” or
“potency”). According to Aristotelian and scholastic
authors, all things other than God, who was pure act, comprised an
active principle, form, and a passive principle of some kind. Forms
had potentialities peculiar to them: the form fire, for example,
produced heat. Its form was its “first act”; its
potentiality to produce heat was its “active
potentiality”. In parallel, the passive principle was a
principle in its own right and had “passive potentiality”,
that is, the potentiality to become the substrate of any form. Bruno
adopted a different stance. Its starting point was Nicholas of
Cusa’s doctrine in 
De possest
 (1460) that act and
potentiality, together with their corresponding active and passive
potentialities (
posse facere/ posse fieri
), coincided in
God’s transcendent unity (BOI I, 692–698, 714; BOL I.2,
312, 344–345). Reinterpreted by Bruno, this meant that God, the
unexplicated supersubstantial unity of the Universal Soul, in harness
with its companion the Universal Intellect, and Universal Matter (see
Figure 2), explicated himself as these two substances in act. By
virtue of being in act, the two substances had, respectively, infinite
“active potentiality” and infinite “passive
potentiality” or, synonymously for Bruno,
“possibility” (BOI I, 692). These two potentialities, both
in the perceptible and intelligible realms, were in equilibrium (BOI
I, 692, 712–713; II, 58–59). Infinite as they were, they
combined to produce a physical universe infinite in time and extent.
Both God and the universe, then, were infinite and “all that can
be” (BOI I, 602, 698), albeit in different ways. In the
universe, the One Being, all potentialities were at any given moment
actualized somewhere in its infinite extent. In God, in whom form and
matter, being and existence, act and potentialities were
undifferentiated, all potentialities were actualized absolutely
without distinctions of time or place (BOI I, 693–694, 698; BOL
I.1, 241–247; III, 39). The infinite extent and duration of the
universe were, then, a corollary of God’s exodus from his
intrinsic essence. The existence of the one presupposed the existence
of the other, even though the latter was ontologically prior.














Figure 2:
 Bruno: active and passive
potentiality [An
 
extended description of figure 2

 is in the supplement.]





Bruno recognized that his position conflicted with Christian truth. It
denied that God had created the universe in time 
ex nihilo
 by
supernatural fiat. The Universal Soul/Intellect and Universal Matter
of his philosophy, as explications of God, were eternal, feign though
he might otherwise before his inquisitors (Firpo 2000, 381 [doc. 51,
§252]), and hence the universe of which they were the immanent
causes was eternal too. God and the universe were indissoluble. It
also contradicted Christian explanations of why God had created a
finite cosmos. God’s absolute and ordained power, scholastic
authors reasoned, were distinct. We should distinguish, they claimed,
between: (a) the unlimited possibilities, apart from
self-contradiction, available to God by virtue of his absolute
potential; and (b) the limited range of possibilities, that is, those
of a finite cosmos, that he freely chose to entertain in his dealings
with creation (Granada 1994). Bruno’s account of act and
potentiality invalidated any such distinction. In God’s absolute
simplicity there was no distinction between “being, power,
doing, willing, essence, potentiality, action, will” and
whatever else that could be predicated of him (BOL I.1, 242–247;
III, 41). The “absolute necessity” whereby he produced all
things was unconstrained and so coincided with “absolute
liberty” (BOL I.1, 243; BOL III, 41). Since, then, his
“will is not contrary or unequal to his potential” (BOL
I.1, 243), the scholastic idea—and indeed Nicholas of
Cusa’s variant of it (
On Learned Ignorance
, II.1, II.8,
Klibansky, 64.14–65.7, 89.3–7; Lai 1973)—that an
omnipotent God chose to create a finite cosmos was incoherent.
Explicated as the infinite active and infinite passive power of,
respectively, the Universal Soul and Universal Matter, his infinite
potential necessarily caused an infinite corporeal universe, the only
fitting “image” of his primary attribute according to the
Creeds, omnipotence (BOL I.1, 241–244, 307–308; Firpo
2000, 381–383, doc. 51, §253).


7. “God Hidden”, His Procession, Nature as “God in Things”


7.1 Divine Transcendence and Immanence



Now, the universe was the expression, not just of God’s power
(
potentia
), but also of his wisdom (
sapientia
) and
goodness (
bonitas
) or, synonymously, love (
amor
)
(BOL I.1, 14; I.2, 359; I.4, 76; BOI II, 577, 630–631).
Scholastic authors and subsequently Renaissance philosophers, too, had
assigned these attributes to the three persons of the
Trinity—Father, Son and Holy Spirit—with the rider that
they denoted aspects of God that reason, without the guidance of
faith, could discern by examining the created world (Thomas Aquinas,

Summa theologiae
, Ia.39.8; 
Super secundam epistolam ad
Corinthios
, XII.3, §544 [1953, 561]; Dante,

Inferno
, III.5–6; Segonds 2000, 553–554; Knox
2020a, 85–86; 2020c, 280). During his trial Bruno told his
inquisitors that, as a philosopher, he defined the Trinity in this way
but then promptly mentioned another formula, one that he admitted was
contrary to faith (Firpo 2000, 67–71, 263–265, docs 13,
51§28). Father, Son and Spirit corresponded to: (a) Mind
(
mens
), understood as “absolute substance” or
“essence”; (b) Intellect (
intellectus
) or
“First Intellect”; and (c) Love (
Amor
). This
triad, with Life (
vita
) sometimes standing for Love, feature
prominently in his surviving works, with minor variations (BOI, II,
357; BOL I.2, 46, 358–359, 365–366; I.4, 73, 79–80,
102–104; III, 37–62, 183, 509). It characterized
God’s intrinsic nature, “God hidden” as Scripture
called it (BOL I.4, 79; III, 41; Isaiah 45:15; similarly Romans 1:20),
and also his procession. Bruno clarified this last point with an
analogy. The sun had: (a) its own intrinsic essence, light and heat,
and: (b) a “vestige” generating the existence of things,
the light to illuminate things and the heat to warm them. Similarly
God was (BOL I.4, 73, 102–103, 113):








intrinsically


extrinsically
 
 






Mind, also called First Mind


Mind, causing all existence, i.e. the Being of the Universe






Intellect, also called First Intellect


the Universal Intellect
 




Love, also called Life


the Universal Soul
 
 





The comparison, he cautioned, was inexact. The sun was a substance
with two accidents, light and heat, whereas no such subject-accident
distinction obtained in God’s triune supersubstantiality (BOL
I.4, 79–80, 103). The First Mind, the First Intellect and Life
or Love were, like the three persons of the Christian Trinity,
“one and the same thing” in him (Firpo 2000, 67, 263, docs
13, 51§28). This intrinsic triune nature was an inference based
on the evidence of Being, the Universal Intellect and the Universal
Soul in all things (BOI II, 357; Firpo 2000, 69, doc. 13).
Bruno’s identification of the extrinsic manifestation of
God’s third person with the World Soul had medieval precedent
(see
 
Section 4
).



The “Platonists”, said Bruno (BOL I.4, 102), had taken
this analogy from “the teaching of the Egyptians”.
Probably his source was a passage in Ficino’s 
On the
Sun
 (ch. 12), in which, adhering to the Christian appropriation
of the Neoplatonic triad being-life-intellect (Proclus, 
Elements
of Theology
, props 101–103; pseudo-Dionysius the
Areopagite, 
The Divine Names
, II.10, 648C-D [§69],
IV.3–4, 697A [§111], V.2–3, 816C-817A
[§257–259]; Thomas Aquinas, 
Super De causis
, props
12–13 [1954, 77–84]), Ficino had likened: (a) the
intrinsic fecundity, light and warmth of the sun and extrinsic life,
light and warmth that it generated; to (b) the being-intellect-life
intrinsic to the inner substance (
substantia
) of the
Christian Trinity and the external manifestations (
vires
) of
being-intellect-life in things. Another purportedly Egyptian source
explained how the three persons were interrelated. Mind, as
supersubstantial being, produced the Intellect as its first, timeless,
“effect” and, enamoured of its offspring, became enflamed
with Love (BOL I.2, 386; I.4, 79–80, 103; III, 44–45,
53–54; Knox 2020c, 278–280). The source for this explanation,
direct or indirect (e.g., Agrippa von Nettesheim, 
De occulta
philosophia
, III.8), was the first definition of God set out in
the pseudo-Hermetic 
Book of the XXIV Philosophers
 mentioned
above
 (
Section 5
).
 Scholastic authors had cited this definition to exemplify how pagan
philosophers, ignorant of revealed truth and reliant on reason alone,
had attained only a partial understanding of the Trinity, one that
failed to discern its true consubstantiality. During his trial Bruno
exploited this stricture. His deliberations on God’s triune
nature, which, he confessed, had begun shortly after becoming a friar,
were merely philosophical, that is, based on “sense and
reason” (see
 
Section 3
).
 As such, they did not challenge the Church’s true
determination, which was grounded in faith (Firpo 2000, 57,
67–75, 263–269, docs 11, 13, 51
§§28–31).



God’s extrinsic trinitarian presence was intermediate between
the metaphysical realm of his intrinsic essence and the physical
universe (BOL I.4, 73). It was immanent, that is to say, in the
universe considered as a whole, in the One Being. Each thing in the
universe, as those “wise men” of Egypt had understood,
participated in its “Being, Life and Intellect” to a
degree commensurate with its kind (BOI II, 357). In other contexts,
too, Bruno similarly emphasized that individual things, including
human beings (BOI I, 455–456), participated, even if only imperfectly,
in God (BOI II, 363; BOL I.3, 146–147; I.4, 79, 81, III, 41;
Firpo 2000, 69, 263–265, docs 13, 51§28). “God is
immediately in all things but all things are not immediately in
God” (BOL I.4, 81). Collectively his variegated presence in them
was Nature, working, not from without, like a sculptor chiselling or
carving into his material, but from within matter (BOI I, 598,
652–654, 680–682; BOL I.2, 312; Firpo 2000, 67, 303, docs
13, 51 §92; cf. Ficino, 
Platonic Theology
, IV.1, for the
analogy). Bruno summarized this idea in his oft-quoted, if frequently
misunderstood, aphorism, “Nature is God in things” (BOI
II, 354; BOL I.2, 151; I.3, 136; I.4, 101). The formula, though not
the exact sense, probably derives from Nicholas of Cusa’s
reconciliation of Plato’s World Soul with Aristotle’s
concept of Nature (
The Layman
, XIII.145). Bruno, true to
character, preferred to trace it, as just mentioned, back to Egypt
(BOI II, 354–355). It was this conviction, he noted, that had
led the ancient Egyptians to venerate vipers, scorpions, onions and
garlic, among other animals and plants (BOI II, 354–355, 363).
Occasionally, to emphasize that Universal Matter included the
potential forms of things, he gave an alternative definition:
“Nature is interior to matter, or rather it is matter
itself” (BOL I.2, 312). The latter formula corresponded to
Avicebron’s definition of matter or, equivalently, Nature as
“God who is in all things” (BOI I, 687). This conclusion
had unfortunately led Avicebron, as mentioned in
 
Section 4
,
 to overlook that the natural forms were elicited by something other
than matter itself, by, that is, the Universal Soul.














Figure 3:
 Bruno’s
Egyptian-Platonic ontology [An
 
extended description of figure 3

 is in the supplement.]





Appeal though he might to Egyptian and Platonic precedent, the
formative inspiration for this account of God’s presence in the
physical world was Christian immanentism. All three
emanations—Being, Universal Intellect and Universal
Soul—of his trinitarian God directly informed the universe.
Pagan Neoplatonists, by contrast, had typically located the triad
being-life-intellect in the two intelligible hypostases Intellect and
Soul intervening successively between God and the world.
Intermediaries of this kind were, Bruno observed on several occasions,
superfluous (BOL II.2, 177–178). An egregious instance was
Platonism’s central tenet: that the Ideas were transcendent,
wholly “separate”, realities (BOI I, 720–721; BOL
I.2, 118, 304, 309–313, 483). Abstract entities, wholly separate
from Universal Matter, were “chimera”, no more than
logical fictions (BOL I.2, 304, 309–310). In what sense, he
asked, could such inventions be outside an infinite universe (BOL I.2,
313)? Instead, the Ideas of the Universal Intellect were, as explained
more fully in
 
Section 7
,
 simply explications of the Idea of Ideas, the First Intellect
intrinsic to God, and they produced and sustained all things directly.
Latin theologians from Augustine onwards had similarly posited the
Ideas as creative agencies located in the mind of God (e.g., Thomas
Aquinas, 
Disputed Questions on Truth
, III.1–3;

Summa theologiae
, Ia.15.1–3). “By means of the
divine intellect understood as the Idea of things”, Thomas
wrote, “created things” imitated, even if only
imperfectly, “the divine essence” (
Disputed Questions
on Truth
, III.2, response). He agreed, explicitly, with
“theologians who understood God to be the immediate cause of
each thing” (BOL II.1, 52–53). The theologians he had in
mind were, in the first instance, Thomas (
Disputed Questions on
Truth
, III.7, response; similarly, Thomas, 
Super librum De
Causis expositio
, prop. 13 §289 [1954, 83]) and, as reported
by Thomas, pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite (
The Divine Names
,
V.8–9, 824C-825B [§§281-284]). His training as a
Dominican theologian
 (
Section 1
),
 despite his apostasy, remained an abiding influence.


7.2 Two Metaphysical Inconsistencies?



Is this “Egyptian-Platonic”—nearabout
Christian—procession compatible with what we may call
Bruno’s Stoic-Cusanian ontology, as outlined in
 
Sections 4

 and
 
6
?
 The accounts apparently conflict in two ways.



First, in the latter account, the Universal Soul and Universal Matter
were two “substances” proceeding from God (BOI I, 698; BOL
I.2, 53; Firpo 2000, 381, doc. 51 §252). Moses (Genesis,
I.2–3) and Hermes Trismegistus (
Pimander
, I.4–6),
explained Bruno, adapting a passage in Ficino’s 
Philebus
Commentary
 (II.4 [1975, 415–419]), had described the
universe as the outcome of a twofold procession of this kind. The
“light” and “darkness” that God had produced,
in the first, ontologically speaking, moment of creation referred to
the “substance” Universal Soul/Intellect, the source of
all other “substances”, and “that vast shadow and
darkness of privation”, Universal Matter (BOL II.3,
117–118; also I.4, 76). By contrast, Bruno’s
Egyptian-Platonic account of God’s procession, as presented
above, ignored Universal Matter. Are we to suppose it to be implicit
in the multiplicity of God’s three extrinsic modes? Infinite
beings participated in the Being of the universe; the Universal
Intellect was a unity of multiple Ideas; and the Universal Soul
generated temporal multiplicity. Plotinus, as Bruno knew
 (
Section 4
),
 had explained multiplicity in the intelligible realm in terms of
intelligible matter. Moreover, on one occasion, shortly before
discussing the Trinity and its procession in Egyptian-Platonic terms,
Bruno described the descent from God’s absolute simplicity, like
Plotinus (I.8.7; II.4.16), as a falling away from goodness, evil being
the ethical correlative of matter: “all things other than him
partake in evil” (BOL I.4, 75). Still, a problem remains.
Universal Matter, in an interpretation of this kind, is not a
substance. The resolution most flattering to Bruno is to say that,
when describing Universal Matter as a substance, he sought to
acknowledge its role as a parhypostasis—that is, as a privation
existent insofar as it occurred in combination with form (BOL I.4,
112)—more fulsomely than pagan Neoplatonists and Christian
theologians had done (BOL III, 25; Plotinus, II.4.16; pseudo-Dionysius
the Areopagite, 
The Divine Names
, IV.2, 697A [§111];
IV.28, 729A-B [§§231-234]; Thomas Aquinas, 
Summa
theologiae
, Ia.15.3, ad 3m). Indicative in this respect are the
opening sections of his 
Lamp of Thirty Statues
 (1587/1591),
in which he correlated the active triad of Mind-Intellect-Spirit or
Love with a counterpart triad of void-passive potentiality-matter
(Granada 2020, 24, 58–59, 62–63; Knox 2020c,
280–282). All three of the latter triad of
“infigurables”, as Bruno called them, were existent: chaos
or void
 (
Section 4
)
 was “the first of all things”, the “preexisting
receptacle” (BOL III, 10, 12); passive potentiality
 (
Section 6
)
 was “infinite yearning”, “desire that was the
constant companion of privation” (BOL III, 16, 23); and matter
was “a wholly stable being [
natura
]”, not
“something imaginary” or “purely logical” (BOL
III, 25). The discrepancy between his Egyptian-Platonic and
Stoic-Cusanian meontologies would not, anyway, have troubled Bruno. A
philosopher, he wrote, with the ludic proclivities of his own
philosophy foremost in mind, could describe matter, its relationship
to the Ideas and other issues from different conceptual standpoints
without contradiction. Good conclusions proved the validity of the
concepts employed in formulating them (BOL I, 688–691).



Second, the ontological status of the Universal Intellect differs in
the two accounts. According to Bruno’s Egyptian-Platonic
procession, the Universal Intellect was a distinct
“substance” (BOL I.4, 122–127). In his
Stoic-Cusanian account, on the other hand, he described it, if only on
one occasion, as a “faculty” of the Universal Soul
 (
Section 4
).
 The inconsistency is mainly a matter of presentation. His
Egyptian-Platonic accounts emphasized that the Universal Intellect,
distinct substance though it was, permanently “concurred
with” or was “situated in” the Universal Soul, and
that both “accompanied” Mind, understood as the cause of
all being (BOL I.4, 107, 123; similarly BOL I.2, 426). That is to say,
as mentioned above
 (
Section 7.1
),
 Mind extrinsically, the Universal Intellect and the Universal Soul
concomitantly, rather than in Neoplatonic causal procession, produced
the universe. When, in fact, describing the Universal Intellect as a
“faculty” of the Universal Soul, Bruno also presented it
as concomitant with, but distinct from, it. To make his point, he took
up Aristotle’s suggestion (
On the Soul
, II.1,
413a8–9), much debated over the centuries, that the individual
soul might relate to its body “as a sailor to his ship”. A
helmsman, in Bruno’s interpretation of the analogy, related to
the motion of his ship in two ways: he moved with it as a part of the
moving whole and also guided the moving whole of which he was a part.
In the latter role, therefore, he was acting, not as a part of the
moving whole, but separately as the cause of its direction. Similarly,
the Universal Soul (the helmsman) was an intrinsic constituent of the
physical universe (the ship), while at the same time its faculty, the
Universal Intellect, governed it extrinsically (BOI I, 655–656).
Aristotle could not object. He had acknowledged that the intellect was
“an efficient cause separate in its being from matter” and
that it “came as a subsistent being from outside, separate from
the composite body and soul” (BOL I, 656). This was a
précis of the scholastic opinion, based on two passages of

On the Soul
 (II.2, 413b24–27; III.5, 430a17–23)
and another in 
On Generation and Corruption
 (II.3,
736b27–29), that Aristotle had shown the intellectual soul to be
immortal (BW III, 353–356). Bruno, it is worth recalling, had
lectured on 
De anima
 at the university in Toulouse for two
years, 1571–1581 (Firpo 2000, 49, 371, docs 11, 51
§227).


8. Panpsychism



Irrespective of these complications, the Universal Intellect was, by
definition, omnipresent in the universe. Bruno explored the
implications of this idea to the full.



The intellect intrinsic to God, the First Intellect, was “the
one supersubstantial Idea of all things” (BOL I.4, 104),
“the first Idea, the fount of all the Ideas” (BOL III, 44)
and “the Idea of the Ideas” (BOL III, 51; BOI II, 678).
Its extrinsic expression, the Universal Intellect, was, along the
lines of the Plotinus’s second hypostasis, “an ideated
world” (BOL II.2, 164), the unity of the manifold Ideas. These
included the Ideas from which the genera and species of things derived
(BOL II.2, 164–165) and also, contrary to what Plato had
believed according to Aristotle (
Metaphysics
, I.9,
990b23–34; Thomas Aquinas, 
Summa theologiae
, Ia.15.3,
ad 4m; 
Disputed Questions about Truth
, III.7, resp.), the
Ideas of “singular things” and “accidents”
(BOL II.1, 51–53). Christian theologians
 (
Section 7.1
),
 Bruno admitted, had quite correctly concluded that there were
“Ideas of all things” (BOL II.1, 53). The Ideas of the
Universal Intellect elicited transient “forms” latent in
Universal Matter, thereby generating the ephemeral things of the
universe
 (
Section 4
).
 This threefold scheme—Ideas implicit in the First Intellect,
explicated in the unity of the Universal Intellect and engaged with
Universal Matter—mapped onto: (a) the three tiers of
Bruno’s threefold “Eleatic” ontology described in
 
Section 5
,
 the superessential God, the universe as the One Being, and the things
in it as non-beings, respectively; and (b) the triad of God
unparticipated (Mind-Intellect-Love), God participated (Mind as the
Being of the universe-Universal Intellect-Universal Soul) and the
things participating in him variously as Nature
 (
Section 7
).



Concurrently God was the cause of all knowledge. He was, as Mind, the
source or “father” of “intelligible light”
(BOL III, 51, 53, 402–403; similarly II.2, 203) and, by virtue
of this light, following the long established explanation of knowledge
as mental seeing, intellects of all stations could apprehend objects
of knowledge. The First Intellect was itself intelligent in that it
was an intellect in act (BOL III, 45), “a sea of light”
(BOL II.1, 45–46). It timelessly “saw” the Idea of
the Ideas bathed in the intelligible light irradiating from God as
Mind. In its act of knowing it was what Bruno called the “First
Intelligence” (BOI II, 622; BOL I.4, 114–115). Similarly,
the Universal Intellect in the act of knowing the Ideas of which it
was the unity was the “Universal Intelligence” (BOI II,
455, 615, 620). The intelligible light radiating from Mind also
illuminated the embodied intellects of demons and human beings,
transforming them into intellects in act. The circuitous manner in
which it did so, however, reflected their subordinate ontological
status. From sense data the interior sense faculties composed
cognitive replicas of the “forms” of natural things (BOI
II, 731–732; BOL II.1, 91–92; II.3, 94). These replicas,
or as Bruno variously called them “intentions”,
“intelligible species” or “shadows of the
Ideas” (BOL II.1, 91–92; BOI II, 732), enabled an embodied
intellect, by coalescing its own weak intelligible light with the
intelligible light originating from Mind (BOL III, 49), to identify
Ideas corresponding to these “shadows” (BOI II,
576–577; BOL II.1, 92; Spruit 1988, 94–95). The theory
that intellection, like sight, could only come about through the
coincidence of like-with-like, one superior to the other, derived
ultimately from Plato (
Republic
, VI.508B–E; BOI II,
732).



There were, then, three “worlds” (
mundi
) with
three correlating kinds of “being” (
ens
): (a) the
metaphysical or quasi-metaphysical realm of the First or Universal
Intellect in which the Ideas were illuminated permanently by
intelligible light; (b) the natural or physical realm comprising
transient “forms” elicited from Universal Matter by the
Ideas in the Universal Intellect; and (c) the “artificial”
realm of the “shadows of the Ideas”, which, illuminated by
intelligible light, enabled embodied souls to recognize the Ideas (BOL
I.1, 14; II.1, 38; II.2, 164; II.3, 94–95, 101; III, 462; Spruit
1988, 28, 66–69). The term 
species
 denoted the aspect
common to a triad of corresponding “beings”: e.g., the
Idea “oak tree”, the “form” of a particular
oak tree and its cognitive replica (BOI I, 668; II, 577; BOL II.3,
101; cf. III, 462, where “Idea” designates all three). To
these in turn corresponded three categories of intellect: 1)
“the divine intellect that is all”, that is, the First
Intellect intrinsic to the triune God; 2) “the cosmic intellect
that makes all”, that is, the Universal Intellect engaging with
Universal Matter; and 3) “the other particular intellects
becoming all”, that is, embodied intellects apprehending
individual Ideas successively (BOI I, 654). Bruno complicated this
straightforward picture by positing a plurality of intermediary
intelligences in “the intelligible world” (Spruit 1988,
230–235, 256–258, 300–316; 1989). The Universal
Intellect/Intelligence permeated all things through intermediary
“secondary” or “separate intelligences” (BOL
I.4, 114–115; III, 51; BOI II, 567), an Arabic and scholastic
category of disembodied being that Bruno described variously. A
separate intelligence known as the “agent intellect”, for
instance, accommodated the Universal Intelligence to the limited,
passive, intellect of human souls (BOI II, 614–615,
620–622, 671; BOL III, 49–50 §§13, 18, III,
267–268). Unlike the Universal Intellect, which contemplated all
its Ideas in one undifferentiated act, separate intelligences
contemplated them discretely (BOL II.1, 38). For Bruno, as for his
Christian predecessors, they were purely cognitive entities, without
creative powers (Augustine, 
The City of God
, XII.25–26;
Thomas Aquinas, 
Summa theologiae
, Ia.45.5, ad 3).



The separate intelligences marked a step in a hierarchy of
intelligences, which, consolidating Bruno’s various comments on
the topic (BOI I, 654, 736; II, 455–456, 594–595; BOL I.4,
114–115, 119–120; II.1, 25, 38; III, 51, 154,
267–268), we can articulate as follows: (a) the intelligence of
God in himself; (b) his intelligence expressed as the Universal
Intellect or Intelligence informing the Universe; (c) the
“separate intelligences”; (d) the intelligence peculiar to
each of the infinite principal bodies, which, in accord with the
privileged nature of their souls (see
 
Section 3
),
 remained unperturbed by their ensouled bodies (BOI I, 512, II, 595;
BOL III, 497); and (e) the intelligence of ensouled bodies inhabiting
the principal bodies. Of this last category, there were two kinds:
first, those that lived in harmony with their ensouled bodies, such as
the intellects of some demons
 (
Section 3
);
 and second, those that were subservient to their ensouled bodies,
such as intellects of human beings (BOI II, 595). Intellects
subservient to their bodies were “passive” intellects,
which, like the light intrinsic to an eye coalescing with sunlight to
produce sight, became active when illuminated by an “agent
intellect” conceived, not as faculty of an individual rational
soul as Thomas Aquinas and others supposed, but either as the
Universal Intellect itself (BOI II, 456, 733; BOL III, 49,
267–268) or as a separate intelligence of the kind mentioned in
the previous paragraph, analogous to the moon in its partial
communication of sunlight (BOI II, 614–615, 620–622).



Thus far Bruno’s account of intellection in ensouled bodies,
whatever its original flourishes, remained within what were in his day
recognizable, primarily Platonic, parameters. Intelligible realities
proceeded from God and intellects “saw” these realities in
the intelligible light coming ultimately from him. The historical
premise for this commutation was the analogy that Plato had drawn
between the Idea of the Good and the sun (
Republic
,
VI.508B–E, 509B; Plotinus, VI.7.16; Ficino, 
Platonic
Theology
, XV.14; BOI II, 732–733). The sun made things grow
and also made them visible to the eye. Similarly, the Idea of the Good
generated the Ideas and, by virtue of its intelligible light, made
them concomitantly “visible” to the mind’s eye, that
is, the intellect. The novelty of Bruno’s interpretation becomes
apparent when we consider what he meant by the intellect of ensouled
bodies. Most philosophers, following, ultimately, Aristotle,
distinguished broadly speaking between: (a) the rational,
intellective, souls of human beings and, some added, demons; (b)
animal souls, which, though endowed with sense perception as well as
vegetative powers, could not reason; and (c) plant or vegetative
souls, devoid of both sense and reason. Bruno, conflating the first
and second of these categories, proposed instead that animals were
intelligent. Testimony were parrots’ speech, the migratory
patterns of birds, spider webs and bee hives. Indeed, in some
respects, animal intelligence surpassed that of human beings. Ants
surpassed human beings in communal organization (BOI I, 550; II,
455–457; BOL I.2, 314; I.4, 118–121; II.2, 175–176;
III, 328).



Instinctual behaviour of this kind was not, as scholastic authors
contended (Thomas Aquinas, 
Summa theologiae
, 2a2ae.95.7),
instilled by providence, the celestial bodies or some other external
intelligent agent (BOI I, 550). Rather, parallel to his idea that the
Universal Intellect elicited corporeal forms from within matter, Bruno
defined animal instincts, like human and demonic intelligence, as
intrinsic but passive powers of intelligence that became actualized
when “illuminated” by the Universal Intellect (BOL I.2,
114–116; I.4, 118–121) or by intermediary “separate
intelligences” of the kind mentioned above (BOI II,
455–456, 614–615). Animal “instincts”, in
fine, were simply types of intelligence that we do not have and so
cannot comprehend (BOL I.4, 118–119). The Universal Intelligence
expressed itself, in keeping with the axiom
 (
Section 4
)
 of “all-in-all” according to a recipient’s capacity
(BOL I.4, 114), within the constraints imposed by the bodily
configuration of a species (BOI II, 455–456). Thus demons
 (
Section 3
)
 varied in intelligence according to species because of the different
elemental constitutions of their bodies (BOL I.4, 118). The
intelligence that human beings enjoyed, 
pace
 Aristotle
(
On the Parts of Animals
, IV.10, 687a7–23), was
determined above all by their hands. In essence human intelligence was
no different from animal intelligence. A snake, were it to acquire,

per impossibile
, hands and the other bodily attributes of a
human being, would acquire human intelligence, and vice versa (BOI II,
455–456; BOL I.2, 331). Plutarch (
Beasts are Rational

[
Moralia
, 985C–992E]; 
Whether Land or Sea Animals
are Cleverer
 [
Moralia
, 959B-992E]), Giambattista Gelli
(
La Circe
, 1549) and Montaigne (
Apology for Raymond
Sebond
 [
Essais
, II.12]), among other classical and
Renaissance apologists of animal intelligence, may have contributed to
Bruno’s observations but the philosophical underpinnings were
his invention.



The Universal Intellect was the cause, not just of intellection, but
also of reason, imagination and sense (BOL I.4, 103–126; II.2,
175–180; II.3, 117–118; III, 52–53, 57–58,
154). All cognitive acts were instantiations of a single cognitive
power, the Universal Intellect, illuminating, like the sun, all things
in varying degrees (BOL I.4,122–123; III, 50, 52–53). It
made no difference whether we speak of its power as sense, intellect,
imagination, vision or hearing (BOL I.4, 114; II.2, 174–175). From the
absolutely simple principle, God, in whom all things coincided,
“a diversity of cognition flows according to the diversity of
species from the Universal Intellect, which is all that is cognizable
and cognizing in all things” (BOL I.4, 118, 125–126).
Hence, to complement the agent intellect, there was, as Averroes and
some scholastic authors had argued, a separate intelligence called the
“agent sense” producing sense in animals (BOI II, 456; BOL
I.2, 366). Plants and other kinds of vegetation, given that they were
animate, also participated in the Universal Intelligence. This was
evident in the way that they reacted to their surroundings, for
example, when they turned towards the sun or shrank away from fire.
Inanimate things such as stones, given that they too were animated, if
only vestigially, by the Universal Soul
 (
Section 3
),
 cognized, as demonstrated by their innate appetite to unite
themselves with a whole and thereby preserve themselves to best
advantage (BOL I.4, 103–104, 107; III, 53, 328, 429. Universal
Intelligence was, no less than its companion, the Universal Soul,
omnipresent and so all things, even the most imperfect, participated
in its intelligence to some degree (BOL I.4, 103–107,
122–123; II.1, 45–46; III, 50–53, 429).
“Whatever exists in some way knows in some way” (BOL I.4,
112; similarly, I.4, 118; III, 46). Divine light spread to all things
in the universe (BOL II.1, 45–46; III, 35). Even matter, given
that it was a substance or parhypostasis
 (
Section 7.2
),
 had a residual cognitive power, one that was evident from its
“appetite” for form (BOL I.4, 112; III, 154).



Bernardino Telesio had similarly proposed that sensation was the
common means whereby all animate and inanimate things sought to
preserve themselves (
On the Nature of Things
, 1570,
I.34–35). Bruno probably knew Telesio’s account but
preferred to present his panpsychism as a revival of an ancient
doctrine, one that Aristotle, as was his wont, had wrongfully
rejected. Empedocles and other ancient philosophers, observed
Aristotle (
On the Soul
, III.3, 427a17–29, 26–27;

Metaphysics
, IV.5, 1009b12–31) and subsequently many others
(e.g., Thomas Aquinas, 
Contra gentiles
, III.84,
§§9, 18), had held that “thought and sensation were
the same”, believing as they did that “thinking was
somatic like perception and that to perceive and to think is done by
like unto like”. It was on these grounds, in fact, that
Empedocles and Parmenides had argued that bodily attributes
conditioned intellect (Aristotle, 
Metaphysics
, IV.5,
1009b12–25; Thomas Aquinas, 
Commentary on Aristotle’s
Metaphysics
, IV.12 [§§672–679]), a conclusion that, as
mentioned in the previous paragraph but one, Bruno took to heart. It
made no difference, he insisted (BOL I.4, 108, 114; II.2, 174),
whether we called this universal power of understanding
“intellect” or “mind”, as, for example,
Empedocles and the Pythagoreans (see
 
Section 4
)
 had done, or, following Epicurus, “sense”. Cognition of
whatever kind was the means whereby each “thing”, animate
or inanimate, identified and thereby desired the end proper to it,
that is, to preserve and perfect itself (BOI II, 692; BOL I.4,
103–104).



The sum of these considerations was that, in combination, the
Universal Intellect and Universal Soul—as explications of the
second and third of God’s three intrinsic persons, Being,
Intellect and Love—ensured that the One Being, the universe, was
not, inappropriately, an undifferentiated and formless image of him
but, rather, a coherent multiplicity of discrete, ephemeral,
“things”, all of which were endowed with a drive of some
kind to preserve themselves. Bruno’s panpsychism or pansensism,
in short, was, as he recognized (BOL II.2, 179–180), a corollary
of his cosmic interpretation of Parmenidean monism (see
 
Section 5
).
 “God produced the universe” and the latter was orderly
because “God was known by the universe” (BOL I.4, 79).
Nevertheless, the formative, if unacknowledged, inspiration for the
immediacy of this rapport was the Christian idea that God directly
made all things
 (
Section 7.1
)
 and that reciprocally all things, whether intellective, rational,
sentient or inanimate, “desired” to reunite with Him by
the means appropriate to their kind (pseudo-Dionysius, 
The Divine
Names
, IV.4, 700A-B [§122], XI.1, 936D-937A
[§§385–387]; Thomas Aquinas, 
Commentary on the Divine
Names
, IV.3, §§3–5 [§314–318]).


9. The Individual Soul and its Perfection



The universe was perfect. As a bodily manifestation of God, it could
not be otherwise. Nothing in it, however “mean”, was
“unconducive to the integrity and perfection of what is
excellent”. There was “nothing that is bad for some things
in some place that is not good and optimal for something
elsewhere” (BOL I.3, 272). Many philosophers and theologians had
said much the same through the ages. “The death of a fly”,
wrote Thomas Aquinas (
Super Sententiis
, lib. 1, d. 39, q. 2
a. 2 co.) “is sustenance for a spider”. Then Thomas added
a qualification. Creatures nobler than the irrational animals, human
beings for example, had a will, which, the more closely it cleaved to
God, was “the more free from the necessity of natural
causes” (ibid.). The cosmos provided the setting for them to
prove that they merited everlasting salvation. For Bruno, however,
they were, like all else, transient “modes” or
“accidents” of the One Being
 (
Section 5
).
 They were, as for Spinoza (
Ethics
, pt IV, prop. 4), parts of
nature, not collectively a privileged species for which, as Christian
doctrine maintained, nature had been created. Individual human beings
were no more than ephemeral corporeal instantiations of “the
eternal human essence”, that is, the Idea of their species (BOI
II, 691–691). As the body aged and decayed, the soul contracted its
powers inwardly, eventually dissociating itself altogether from it
before reuniting with the Universal Soul (BOI I, 513–514; II,
180–183). “All spirits”—‘spirit’ here
being equivalent to ‘soul’—“are from the sea
of one spirit and that all return to that spirit” (BOI II,
450–451; BOL I.3, 209–210; III, 60; Knox 2013,
471–472; 2020c, 283–299).



Hermes Trismegistus (
Pimander
, X.7, X.15) and, according to
doxographers, Pythagoras (Aëtius, 
Placita
, IV.7, 899C),
Heraclitus (Gianfrancesco Pico, 
Examen vanitatis doctrinae
gentium
, I.14 [2022, 107]) and, among other Stoics, Chrysippus
(Diogenes Laertius, VII.143) were of this opinion too. Provocative as
ever, Bruno preferred to invoke the authority cherished most by his
adversaries. “Well it is said, too, in Holy Scripture
[
Ecclesiastes
 12:7] that the body dissolves into dust, that
is to say, atoms
 [
Section 3
],
 and that the spirit returns to its source” (BOL III, 256).
Adding insult to injury, to reinforce his argument that souls were
instantiations of the Universal Soul, Bruno adapted an analogy that
scholastic theologians often used to explain how Christ remained
present in every piece of a consecrated eucharistic host after it was
broken by a priest celebrating mass. A mirror displayed the image of
the sun above. If shattered, every piece, some more perfectly than
others, also displayed the sun’s image. Analogously, each soul
was a fragment of the one Universal Soul (BOL III, 58; Knox 2020c,
283–294). More exactly, adpating Ficino’s interpretation of how
the World Soul related to other souls (
Platonic Theology
,
IV.1), Bruno explained that the human soul was an instantiation of the
soul vivifying the principal body that it inhabited, which was in turn
an instantiation of the soul vivifying the solar system to which it
belonged
 (
Section 3
),
 which in turn was an instantiation of the Universal Soul, which in
turn was a manifestation of God (BOL I.3, 209–210). On those
occasions when he drew a distinction between soul (
anima
) and
spirit (
spiritus
), Bruno reached a similar conclusion (BOL
III, 182–183). An individual spirit was a portion of spirit
(
spiritus
) understood as the semi-corporeal, semi-incorporeal
“air” mediating between the Universal Soul and its body,
the physical universe
 (
Section 3
).



We might, then, surmise that the human soul forfeited individuality on
the death of the body. A conclusion of this sort would align with
Bruno’s monism, particularly with its corollaries: (a) that the
universe was animated throughout by a single soul, the Universal Soul
 (
Sections 4

 and
 
7
);
 (b) that the forms of corporeal things elicited by the Universal
Intellect from Universal Matter were transient
 (
Section 4
);
 (c) that all things, animate and seemingly inanimate alike,
participated in the cognitive power of the Universal Soul’s
constant companion, the Universal Intellect
 (
Section 7
).
 Bruno, nonetheless, insisted that souls, or at least souls of a kind
that could inhabit human bodies, were “immortal” (BOL I.3,
143). The soul was “individual”, in the sense of the Latin
word 
individuus
, meaning “indivisible”, and so,
like an atom, indestructible (BOL I.3, 143). He realized that this
position was problematic. He toyed with Plotinus’s view, as
interpreted by Ficino, that “particular souls” were
distinct from the Universal Soul because they and the Universal soul
alike were souls, immortal ones, dependent on the hypostasis Soul (BOL
III, 58–59; Knox 2020c, 294–298). He had good reason to be
reluctant to concede that they were mortal. If a soul perished with
its body, it could not be rewarded or punished for its conduct during
its embodied existence. Morality would have no final sanction.



To overcome this impasse, Bruno turned to ancient doctrines of
metempsychosis. We should await mutation serenely, not fear death, as
Pythagoras, or more exactly Ovid’s ‘Pythagoras’, had
observed (Ovid, 
Metamorphoses
, XV.153–175; BOI I, 665;
BOL I.3, 142–143). In one important respect, however, Bruno
interpreted metempychosis differently from Pythagoras, the
Pythagoreans, Plato, Platonists, the Sadducees, Scripture (Psalm 36:6
[KJV]), Origen and the Druids (BOI II, 452, 598–599; BOL I.3,
142–143). The Universal Soul was inseparable from Universal Matter
 (
Sections 8

 and
 
7.2
)
 and the same therefore applied to particular souls (BOI II, 183). On
the death of the body, they did not endure a shadowy existence in some
other world before reincarnation in the manner that the
“Pythagorean” Virgil (
Aeneid
, VI.743–751)
and others had described. With the extinction of one body, the soul
turned its operative powers to forming a new one, the limitations of
which were determined by Providence (BOI II, 183–185; BOL III, 257,
429–430; Knox 2020b, 36; 2020c, 299–300). The One Being,
as Providence or Fate, thereby ensured that, by means of the perpetual
change or “vicissitude” that it imposed on natural things,
retributive justice prevailed (BOI II, 180–185, 457–459).
Someone who behaved like a pig had been a pig in a previous
incarnation or, on account of his or her conduct, was doomed to become
a pig in the next. Bruno’s patron in Venice, Giovanni Mocenigo,
reported to the Inquisition —how truthfully is open to question
— that Bruno had once admonished him for killing a spider. It
may have been, Bruno had remarked, a reincarnation of one of his,
Bruno’s, former friends (Firpo 2000, 341, doc. 51, §179).
True to these convictions, inspired by Erasmus or perhaps Agrippa von
Nettesheim, he condemned the aristocratic obsession with hunting and
the customs that it nurtured (BOI II, 388–389).



How could an individual soul endowed with a human body ensure a
prosperous reincarnation? By contemplating the One Being, the universe
(BOI I, 263), that is, by turning away from “the buffeting
vortices of disruptive [sensible] matter” (BOL II.2, 194) and,
as many before Bruno had urged, passing beyond sense data to the
intelligible principles underlying it (Spruit 1988, 226–230). From
sensibilia the soul composed intelligibilia by virtue of the
intelligible light of the Universal Intellect, in which all souls, as
indeed all other things to some degree
 (
Section 8
),
 participated. These intelligibilia were, as mentioned above
 (
Section 8
),
 in the first instance, “shadows of the Ideas”. The
orderly variety of things, their groupings in species and genera (BOI
736–737; BOL I.1, 203; I.4, 86–87; II.2, 164), encouraged
the soul, or at least the philosopher’s soul, to pass beyond
these shadows to the Ideas themselves (BOL II.1, 45–46,
51–52; II.2, 164) and “to attune its thoughts and deeds to
the symmetry of the law inherent in all things” (BOI II, 557).
In this ascent, the two powers of the intellective soul, intellect and
will —as embodiments of the First Intellect and Love
 (
Section 7
)
 — spurred each other on reciprocally to ever greater endeavours
(BOI II, 539, 576–578, 584, 708–714; Spruit 1988,
236–251, 269–276). For Bruno, then, the great scholastic
and Renaissance debate about about which of the two was primary in the
soul’s pursuit of perfection was beside the point. The
philosopher’s final step was to understand and become enrapt
intellectually with the Ideas, not discretely, but as a unity. He
came, in other words, to understand the Universal Intellect. Given
that, in accordance with the almost universally accepted axiom,
deriving ultimately from Aristotle (
De anima
, III.4–5,
429b30–430a20), that the intellect in an act of intellection was
identical with its obect, the philosopher at this juncture lost his
individual intellectual identity. He was taken out of himself and knew
himself as part of the divine presence in the things of the universe
(BOI II, 578–579, 658–659, 695–696; Spruit 1988,
262–272).



Beyond this, he could not pass, yearn though he might to reach God
himself (BOI II, 678). He could discover God’s
“shadow”, an allusion to I Corinthians (13:12), that is,
“the world, the universe and Nature that is in things”,
the “monad” that “proceeds from the monad that is
divinity” (BOI II, 564, 696). He could gaze upon this
“image of him”, but not his “absolute light”
(BOI II, 564–565, 694–697; Spruit 1988, 36,
221–276). In short, he could know him only vestigially, as
philosophers and theologians of many schools had said in various ways
(BOI I, 647–649; II, 575–577), and even then only
imperfectly given that an individual intellect, finite as it was,
could not fully comprehend the infinite universe (BOI I, 649; II,
584–586, 667–669, 708–714; Spruit 1988,
275–276). The few who aspired to perfection in this way were
“divine”, “heroic”, “rare” men,
inspired by “a superior light” (BOI I, 453, 475, 525; II,
695). These aspirations inspired Bruno’s doctrine of
“love” in his prose-poem masterpiece, 
The Heroic
Frenzies
, and his interpretation of poetic or more generally
creative genius (BOI I, 525; II, 527–528). His art of memory and
Llullism, in their theoretical applications, were additional resources
in this pursuit of self-fulfilment. By constructing a memory palace
that mirrored the hierarchical structure of the intelligible universe,
the soul could move from the accidental multiplicity of the universe
to the unity of the Universal Intellect and vice versa (Sturlese
1994). Gnoseological aspirations of this kind, though foreign to
traditional mnemonics, which had focused on rhetorical and didactic
applications, were not without precedent, Giulio Camillo’s

L’idea del teatro
 being an example. With the same
purpose in mind, Bruno designed and cut the wood engravings of
ontological realities that feature, like proto-Jungian mandala, in
several of his works.








Figure 4:
 Giordano Bruno, “Figura
intellectus”, discussed in 
Corpus iconographicum. Le
incisioni nelle opere a stampa
, ed. M. Gabriele (Milan, 2001)
374–379; and reconstructed by Raymond Kotty at
 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rAw8thcZsgU






10. Religion



Marsilio Ficino, Giovanni Pico della Mirandola (in one phase of his
career) and other Renaissance authors had held similarly
“Pelagian” views that philosophy led to self-perfection
and “deification”. Yet they had stopped well short of
denying the integrity of Christianity. Philosophy and religion were,
so to speak, two parallel paths, suited to different audiences. Bruno
had no such scruples. Philosophy—Bruno’s philosophy of God
as immanent in an infinite universe as announced in 
The Ash
Wednesday Supper
—was the true bread of life. It
“illuminated the blind”, “loosed the tongue of the
dumb”, “cured the lame”, so that the human spirit
could once again “progress” (BOI I, 454). Its powers, that
is, were miraculous, Christ-like, salvific. By contrast, Christian
practices and ideals were fraudulent (BOI II, 263–266, 658).
Under a thin veil of irony, all the while denying the irony, Bruno
praised the various guises under which Christianity taught that
ignorance of the natural world led the soul to God. Among its many
deceits were: scriptural injunctions to acknowledge our ignorance,
notably, the Pauline theme of folly; the ascetic mysticism of
pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite and mystics generally; claims that the
light of faith and revelation were superior to human knowledge;
Augustine’s emphasis on the fallen nature of mankind,
particularly the corruption of knowledge innate to it; injunctions to
be childlike and meek; and the humility and obedience that the
Christian clergy sought to instil among its flock (BOI II,
380–384, 415, 422–430, 443–448; BOL I.2, 316). The
philosopher should ignore these “foolish dreams” (BOL I.3,
200)—in practical as well as in intellectual endeavours. To be
virtuous was to strive against adversity and to aspire, even if with
only partial or little success (BOI I, 475–476; II, 568), to an
ever greater understanding of intelligible reality
 (
Section 9
).
 The unremitting nature of this quest was not the outcome of, so to
speak, a Promethean or Adamic fall from divine favour, but rather
part-and-parcel of the vicissitude characterizing the universe of
things
 (
Section 3
).
 “Where opposites meet, there is order, there resides
virtue” (BOI II, 549). Who deserved praise the more: someone who
healed a worthless cripple, or a man who liberated his homeland or who
reformed, not a mere body, but a mind (BOI II, 264–267)? In
other words, who was the true saviour: Christ or Bruno?



Simultaneously, with the same indignation that Spinoza and Nietzsche
would later voice, Bruno impugned the clerical caste. Living
parasitically off the labours of others (BOI II, 238–239) and
affecting “a foul-smelling melancholy”, i.e.,

accidia
 (BOL II.2,189–190), they advocated the solitary
life and renunciation of this world for the next. Such men had
extinguished the divine light that had made the souls of the ancients
“heroic and divine” (BOI I, 453). Of all peoples, the
ancient Romans had best understood the value of “glory”
for establishing and maintaining civilization. A true religion, like
that of the ancients, extolled men of action, strength of body and
mind and worldly glory (BOI II, 267–268). Similar comments on
clerical duplicity, glory and religion occur in Machiavelli, whose
works Bruno had probably read.



Nevertheless, religion had a role to play. The “uneducated
populace” (BOI I, 525; II, 514–515) could not aspire to
philosophical perfection. They needed laws and sanctions to keep their
conduct in check. Religion, with its promises of reward and punishment
in an afterlife, served this purpose. When Moses had led the
Israelites from captivity, they were no more than an uneducated
rabble. To govern them, he established laws and enforced them with
terrifying accounts of an almighty, wrathful God who administered
retribution in an afterlife. Scripture, whether Jewish, Islamic or
Christian, had been composed with this practical goal in mind (BOI I,
522–528). Admittedly, Bruno conceded, Scripture did sometimes
record philosophical truths. Genesis and the Book of Job were
conspicuous repositories. This was only to be expected, given that
Scripture was a tributary of “the ancient philosophy” (see
 
Section 2
).
 For the most part, however, it simplified. Several passages of
Scripture (e.g., Ecclesiastes, 1:5–6; Joshua 10:12–13)
implied that the sun circled the motionless earth. This was a
simplification made for the benefit of the uneducated. Disquisitions
based on a true, heliocentric, interpretation of celestial motion
would have, at best, confused them and, at worst, led them,
counterproductively, to dismiss Scripture’s tales of divine
retribution (BOI I, 522–525).



To claim that Scripture made allowances for the weak understanding of
most men and women was nothing new. Patristic, Catholic and Protestant
theologians acknowledged that Moses had addressed an ignorant, slavish
people and that Scripture spoke in a way that the uneducated could
understand. All agreed, too, that it focused on moral and spiritual
issues and refrained from intricate philosophical arguments.
Bruno’s appeal to these positions disguised his heterodoxy. The
crucial deviation was his denial of miracles, the most important of
all testimonies to the Christian faith. Given that the laws of nature
were, essentially, “God in things”, they were
“inviolable” (BOL I.2, 316). In this respect, he went far
beyond the Paduan natural philosopher Pietro Pomponazzi
(1462–1525), who, disposed though he was to attribute miraculous
events, Scriptural or otherwise, to natural causation, allowed that
some were authentic. Repeatedly Bruno mocked, allusively, the miracles
reported in the Old and New Testament, including those performed by
Moses and Christ (BOI II, 380–381; BOL III, 397; Firpo 2000,
277–279, §51.41–42). Christ’s were

bagatelle
, “sleights of hand” (BOI II, 383). They
were no more than “natural magic” (BOL II.2, 73, 199),
effects produced by manipulating “occult”, that is,
natural, though imperceptible, forces (BOL II.1, 348, citing II.2,
180–193). Or, indeed, they may have been the fruits of demonic magic,
a comment which implied that Christ had commerce with demons. Christ
began to perform miracles, Bruno noted, only “after his struggle
with the devil in the desert” (BOL II.2, 181). The allusive
style in which Bruno disguised his views only served to accentuate his
blasphemies, mixing as they did ridicule and contempt with heresy.
Handwritten annotations in copies of his works show that
contemporaries or near contemporaries recognized his intentions easily
enough (Sturlese 1987).



Philosophers, “heroes”, did not need Scripture’s
bogus threats of retribution and promises of future rewards to cajole
them into behaving morally. They understood the “pattern
(
istoria
) of Nature inscribed within [them]” (BOI II,
24–25), that God, in other words, was with and within them (BOI
I, 455–456; II, 658–659), and governed their actions
accordingly. Those who considered the matter carefully, “truly
religious men”, “men who are good by nature”, would
see that Bruno’s philosophy, more than any other, “not
only contains the truth but also favours religion” (BOI I, 528).
They did not need rituals involving some “food and drink”
to revere the divine (BOL I.1, 205; Knox 2020b). On diverse occasions,
he covertly mocked the Eucharist (BOL II.2, 181–182), despising
as he did the “subtleties” of scholastic accounts of
transubstantiation (Spampanato 1933, 40). Instead, it was the majesty
of Nature, the infinite animate, panpsychic universe, that inspired
the wonder and reverence of truly divine men and led them to search
for its cause (see
 
Section 5
).
 In so doing they became themselves “greater than those gods
whom blind commoners worship” (BOI II, 24). Stripped, in short,
of its false claims, Christianity could be seen for what it was, a
“foolish faith and blind credulity” (BOI II, 386;
similarly, II, 398), “a wretched story” (BOL I.2, 172),
“a worthless, pernicious fable” (BOI II, 400), a
continuation of Judaism, a religion invented by that “pestilent,
leprous and wholly pernicious” race, the Jews (BOI II,
314–315; for similar stereotypical anti-Jewish comments, see
 
Section 2

 and the caveat there regarding the extent to which they reflect
Bruno’s views). With its threats that the world would end and
its stories of a God who wrought miracles at whim, it had cowed a
“stupefied” world into despising Nature—“God
in things”—and, “having smashed the tables of
Nature” (cf. Exodus, 32:19), looked forward joyfully to the ruin
of all things (BOL I.2, 123).



Bruno’s several clashes with ecclesiastical authorities testify
to his impatience with Christianity of whatever shade. The sectarian
violence that plagued the sixteenth century plainly showed that it had
done the very opposite of what religion should do (BOL II.2, 181).
There are, however, many indications that Bruno found Protestantism
the more irksome variant. Above all Protestants’ denial of the
efficacy of “good works” and free will and, conversely,
their emphasis on the inner spirit, predestination and justification
through “faith alone”, were unconducive to civil order,
political stability and material prosperity. They had purloined the
churches, temples, chapels, hospices, hospitals, colleges and
universities established by the labour of “others”, that
is, by Catholics, while declaring that “their every concern was
with things invisible” (BOI II, 238–239). The latter, although
“imperfect and not as good as they should be”, had, unlike
their “pernicious” Prostestant counterparts, promoted the
well-being of the state, encouraged philosophical pursuits and
morality, and rewarded well-doers (BOI II, 238). In these respects,
indeed, they were not so different to the ancient Romans (BOI II,
267). At several points Bruno’s turn of phrase suggests that his
ridicule of Protestant theology was directed specifically against
Luther’s 
On the Bondage of the Will
 (1525) and that, in
formulating his riposte, he drew on Erasmus’s 
On Free
Will
 (1524), the work that had prompted Luther to write his
treatise in the first place.


11. Bruno’s Afterlife



Bruno’s philosophy, his views on religion and his execution
earned him notoriety. “It is reasonable to denounce
Bruno”, wrote the French mathematician, philosopher and
theologian Marin Mersenne (1588–1648), “as one of the most
evil men that the earth has ever borne” (Mersenne,

L’Impiété des déistes
, ch. 10).
What perturbed Mersenne and many others, including Descartes, was not
so much Bruno’s doctrines concerning the earth’s mobility,
the elemental homogeneity of the universe, the plurality of worlds and
other cosmological innovations, but rather the underlying doctrine of
the World Soul and its perceived corollaries: pantheism, demonology,
magic, metempsychosis, the claim that God’s absolute power
necessitated an infinite product, the essential identity of human,
plant and animal souls, the elimination of individual responsibility,
denial of miracles—in short, “atheism”.



Demonizing Bruno lent him, however, a certain fascination. To his
dismay, Mersenne observed that some of his compatriots amused
themselves by reading his 
On the Cause, the Principle and the
One
. During the course of the seventeenth century, Bruno’s
ideas continued to appeal to libertines, Rosicrucians and other
unorthodox thinkers, despite, or perhaps because of, the censures of
conventional theologians and philosophers. In his 
Oculus
sidereus
 (
Starry Gaze
), published at Danzig in 1644, the
Rosicrucian Abraham von Franckenberg (1593–1652), a pupil of
Jacob Böhme, included a synopsis, the first to be printed, of
Bruno’s Latin prosimetrum treatise, 
De immenso
 (1591),
relating its ideas to those of ancient and Renaissance authors.
Bruno’s space, wrote Franckenberg, was the Kabbalists’
“God as space”, their Ensoph, the first of the ten
Sephiroth (Ricci 1990, 137–152). In England and on the
Continent, John Toland championed Bruno’s philosophy, incurring
the disapproval of Leibniz and others. Leibniz’s early
enthusiasm for Bruno had dissipated; the striking similarities between
aspects of his monadology and Bruno’s doctrine of minims are
probably attributable to the sources and philosophical interests that
they shared in common, rather than direct influence (Brown 2002).
Among the seventeenth-century champions of heliocentricism, Johannes
Kepler, averse though he was to Bruno’s suggestion that the
universe was infinite and his apparent conflation of God and matter,
engaged circumspectly with his cosmological ideas on several
occasions, particularly through the intermediary of the Imperial
Counsellor to Rudolph II, Johannes Matthaeus Wacker von Wackenfels, an
enthusiast of Bruno’s cosmology (Ricci 1990, 68–79;
Granada 2008). In private conversation, Kepler, the newly appointed
Imperial Mathematician, chided Galileo for not having acknowledged the
contribution that others, including Bruno and himself, had made to the
novelties recorded in his 
Starry Messenger
, published in 1610
(Hasdale 1610).



Interest in Bruno’s philosophy remained, nevertheless, sporadic.
Copies of his works were hard to come by and, for the most part, the
ideas in them remained curiosities, outlined in encyclopedias and
histories of philosophy, such as those of Pierre Bayle and J. J.
Brucker, with warnings about his extravagant, wayward, genius. More
than any other philosopher, Bruno proved “that often the greater
the power of intellect, the less judgement there is” (Brucker,

Historia critica philosophiae
, IV, pt 2, 30).
“Gold” there was to be discovered, but it lay concealed
within the “dung” of his confused thinking (ibid., 31).
What changed Bruno’s fortunes decisively was the advent of
“Spinozism”. The similarities between Bruno’s and
Spinoza’s substance monism had long been noticed. Bayle, no
admirer of Spinoza, pointed them out, as did Mathurin Veyssière
de Lacroze by way of denigrating Bruno as an “atheist”
(Veyssière de Lacroz, 
Entretiens
, 284–325).
Brucker conceded that there were some resemblances but concluded that
Bruno did not merit the charge of “Spinozism” (ibid., 52),
arguing that, for Bruno, the universe emanated from, rather than was
identical with, God (see
 
Sections 5–7
).
 Then, spectacularly, in the second half the eighteenth century Bruno
passed from being a heinous atheist to, in Herder’s estimation,
someone comparable to, indeed “undoubtedly still more
divine” than St John the Evangelist (McFarland 1969, 77). The
key moment was the publication in 1785 of F. H. Jacobi’s 
On
the Doctrine of Spinoza in Letters to Herr Moses Mendelssohn
, in
which Jacobi, without Mendelssohn’s consent, published an
exchange of letters between them concerning Lessing’s alleged
“Spinozism” and Spinoza’s philosophy more generally.
Jacobi, an opponent of Enlightenment rationalism, praised
Spinoza’s philosophy, in the “purified” form
proposed by some exponents, as an exemplary manifestation of what pure
reason, left to its own devices, could achieve. Equally, however, it
manifested the limitations of reason, more specifically rational
theism. It led essentially to materialism, fatalism and atheism. In
1789, Jacobi issued an expanded edition of his work, which included,
in a new preface, a brief discussion of Bruno and his monism and, in
an appendix, a German paraphrase of 
On the Cause, the Principle
and the One
 together with an extended quotation from the second
dialogue in the original Italian. His purpose in combining Spinoza and
Bruno was to provide “a summa of the philosophy of the
‘ἑν καὶ
πάν’”, a reference to Lessing’s
“pantheist” theology as well as an allusion to
Heraclitus’s monism. “It was difficult to give a purer or
better explained summary of pantheism” than that provided by
this “dark man”, Giordano Bruno (Jacobi, 
Ueber die
Lehre des Spinoza
, 
IX
, 
XI
). The
epithet alluded, quite appropriately given the intricacies of
Bruno’s philosophy, to the sobriquet
Σκοτεινός
(‘Dark’ or ‘Obscure’) by which Heraclitus was
known in antiquity and thereafter on account of his obscure, riddling,
style (e.g. Cicero, 
On Ends
, II.5.15).



In the ensuing intellectual uproar, the 
Pantheismusstreit

(“Pantheism controversy”) that dominated late eighteenth-
and early nineteenth-century German philosophy, Bruno emerged as the
great precursor of Spinoza and a major philosopher in his own right.
Spinoza and Spinozists had followed in Bruno’s footsteps,
concluded F. W. J. Schelling, who wrote a dialogue, 
Bruno or On
the Divine and Natural Principle of Things
 (1802), setting out a
Platonized form of Spinozism. Goethe, writing to Schiller, while
expressing reservations, confided that what he understood or thought
he understood of the dialogue was in tune with his “innermost
convictions” (McFarland 1969, 247). Many others concurred, among
them Hegel, who, in his 
Lectures on the History of Philosophy

(1827–28), praised Bruno’s writings, fantastic and
confused though they might be, for displaying “a sense of
indwelling spirit”. Coleridge was a steadfast admirer, even in
later life, when his philosophical and religious views were less
consonant with Bruno’s. “This man”, he wrote in
1819, “though a pantheist, was religious” (Gatti 2011,
203). This new found enthusiasm led to the publication of editions of
Bruno’s Italian and Latin works in Germany by Adolph Wagner
(1830) and August Friedrich Gfrörer (1836) respectively, the
first editions of his works in their original languages since the
mid-seventeenth century.



This European revival was the setting for Bruno’s rehabilitation
in Italy. Hegel, Michelet and others had portrayed the period that we
now know, thanks to Michelet, as the Renaissance and Reformation as
the birthplace of modernity. This was manifest above all, though not
exclusively, through the artistic, literary and philosophical
achievements of the period, which had broken the Roman Catholic
Church’s dominance in spiritual and cultural concerns. For many,
the most conspicuous being Jacob Burckhardt in 
The Civilization of
the Renaissance in Italy
 (1860), the honour for this rupture
belonged principally to the Italians, “the first born among the
sons of modern Europe” (pt 2, ch. 1). Sentiments of these kinds
were welcome in Italy. Pride in its cultural achievements fed into the
crescendo of nationalist fervour—the “Risorgimento”,
leading eventually to the proclamation of Italy as an independent
kingdom in 1861—and mounting hostility in some circles towards
the Roman Catholic Church. The Church had been blamed for the
peninsula’s political fragmentation and intellectual atrophy
ever since the Counter-Reformation.



Circumstances could scarcely have been more propitious for heterodox
Renaissance thinkers such as Telesio, Tommaso Campanella, Galileo and,
above all, Bruno. For many Italians, his philosophy, heroic defiance
of ecclesiastical authority and execution exemplified the long
struggle to free philosophy from the trammels of revealed religion.
Popular versions of Bruno’s life and death likened him to
Socrates, Christ or, nearer home, martyrs of the Risorgimento. This
adulation found its most visible expression in the monumental bronze
statue, designed by the sculptor Ettore Ferrari, a mason and later
Grand Master of the masonic lodge, the Grande Oriente d’Italia,
located in Rome. In 1889, in the face of tooth-and-nail opposition
from the Vatican, the statue was erected, glaring directly towards the
Holy See, on the very spot in the Campo dei Fiori where Bruno was
believed to have been burned at the stake. For nineteenth-century
Italian intellectuals such as Vincenzo Gioberti, Bertrando Spaventa
and Francesco Fiorentino, he was, as he had been for Enlightenment
thinkers, a “Spinozist” in many respects or more broadly,
a secular humanist, someone who had liberated the human spirit from
the suffocating confines of religious orthodoxy and paved the way for
modern philosophy and natural science. Catholic apologists rose to the
Church’s defence, belittling this “Brunomania”, as
they labelled it, and on occasion denying that Bruno had been
executed. Amid the turmoil, Bertrando Spaventa, Felice Tocco,
Francesco Fiorentino and other Italian scholars produced critical
editions of Bruno’s Latin and Italian works or wrote studies on
them, thereby laying the foundations of modern Bruno scholarship and
appreciation of him as a philosopher. During the twentieth century
Bruno enjoyed a reputation among orthodox historians of the Soviet
Union as the first modern genius of a materialist philosophy; those
who, like Lev Karsavin, presented a philosophically and historically
contextualized interpretation of his thought, were persecuted for
their “bourgeois” views. Comparatively recent attempts to
establish magic or mnemotechnics as the key to his philosophy such as
those of Frances Yates, valuable though they remain for their many
incidental details and insights, obscure Bruno’s stated
intention to articulate a “new philosophy”, 
tout
court
.






Bibliography


Abbreviations




BOI


Bruno, 
Opere italiane
, ed. Aquilecchia, listed
below.


BOL


Bruno, 
Opere latine conscripta
, listed below. The
page numbers in BOL are indicated in the margins of many later
editions and translations. Roman numbers following the abbreviations
indicate volume numbers; an Arabic numeral immediately after a Roman
numeral and full stop indicates a separately paginated part of a
volume. Hence “BOL II.3, 213” designates Bruno, 
Opera
latine scripta
, volume II, part 3, page 213.


BW


Bruno, 
Werke
, as listed below.


DK


Diels and Kranz, as listed below.


KJV


Bible, King James Version, as listed below.




Primary Literature


Works by Bruno


Collections of works by Bruno




Opera latine conscripta
, 3 volumes in 8 pts, F.
Fiorentino, F. Tocco, G. Vitelli, and others (eds), Naples and
Florence, 1879–91. (Reprinted, Stuttgart, 1961–62.)


Oeuvres complètes
, 7 volumes, G. Aquilecchia
(ed.), Italian texts; with French translations and commentaries by
various authors, Paris, 1993–99. (Corrected editions,
2003–.)


Opere italiane
, 2 volumes, G. Aquilecchia (ed.) Italian
texts; introd. N. Ordine, with commentaries by various authors, Turin,
2002.


Opere magiche
, S. Bassi, E. Scapparone, and N. Tirinnanzi
(eds), Latin texts with Italian translations, introd. M. Ciliberto,
Milan, 2000.


Opere mnemotecniche
, 2 volumes, M. Matteoli, R. Sturlese,
and N. Tirinnanzi (eds), Latin texts with Italian translations,
introd. N. Tirinnanzi, Milan, 2004–09.


Opere lulliane
, Latin texts with Italian translations by
M. Matteoli, R. Sturlese and N. Tirinnanzi, with an introduction by M.
Ciliberto, Milan, 2012.


Corpus iconographicum. Le incisioni nelle opere a stampa
,
ed. M. Gabriele, Milan, 2001.


Werke
, 7 volumes, T. Leinkauf (general editor), Hamburg,
2007–18; G. Aquilecchia (ed.), Italian texts; with German
translations and detailed commentaries by various authors.




Individual Works by Bruno



The website 
La biblioteca ideale di Giordano Bruno. Le opere e le
fonti
 (in the
 
Other Internet Resources

 section below), includes lists of Bruno’s Italian and Latin
works, with links to the texts.


English translations of Bruno’s works




1950, 
On the Infinite Universe and Worlds
, in Dorothea
Waley Singer, 
Giordano Bruno. His Life and Thought, with an
Annotated Translation of his Work
 On the Infinite Universe and
Worlds, New York: H. Schuman. (Translation of 
De l’infinito,
universo e mondi
, first published at London in 1584. For a modern
edition of the Italian text, see BOI II, 7–167.) 


1964, 
The Expulsion of The Triumphant Beast
, tr. Arthur
D. Imerti, New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press. Reprint,
Lincoln, NE: University of Nebraska Press, 1992. (Translation of

Spaccio de la bestia trionfante
, first published at London in
1584. For a modern edition of the Italian text, see BOI II,
169–404.)


1998, 
Cause, Principle and Unity: and Essays on Magic
,
tr. Robert de Lucca, with 
Essays on Magic
, tr. Richard J.
Blackwell, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. (Translations of: 1)

De la causa, principio et uno
, originally published at London
in 1584, corresponding to the modern edition in BOI I, 591–746;
2) 
De magia
, published for the first time in BOL III,
395–506; and 3) 
De vinculis in genere
, published for
the first time in BOL III, 635–700.)


2002, 
The Cabala of Pegasus
, tr. Sidney L. Sondergard and
Madison U. Sowell, New Haven, CT: Yale University Press. (Translation
of 
Cabala del cavallo pegaseo
, first published at London in
1585. For a modern edition of the Italian text, see BOI II,
405–484.)


2013, 
On the Heroic Frenzies. A Translation of
 De gli
eroici furori, Italian text ed. Eugenio Canone, English translation by
Ingrid D. Rowland, Toronto: University of Toronto Press. (First
published at London in 1585. For a modern edition of the Italian text,
see BOI II, 485–753.)


2018, 
The Ash Wednesday Supper
, tr. Hilary Gatti,
Toronto: University of Toronto Press. (Translation of 
La cena de
la ceneri
, first published at London in 1584. For a modern
edition of the Italian text, see BOI I, 425–590.)





New English translations of Bruno’s Italian works are appearing
in the Lorenzo Da Ponte Italian Library, a series published by the
University of Toronto Press. At the time of writing (December, 2023),
the series includes Rowland’s translation of 
On the Heroic
Frenzies
 and Gatti’s translation of 
The Ash Wednesday
Supper
, both as listed above. A translation of the 
Expulsion
of the Triumphant Beast
 by Gatti in the same series is due to
appear in mid-2024.


Documents relating to Bruno’s life and trial




Firpo, Luigi (ed.), 2000, 
Le procès [de Giordano
Bruno]
, Italian and Latin texts, together with a French
translation by A.–P. Segonds, Paris: Les Belles Lettres.
(Original Italian edition, without Segond’s supplementary notes,
Rome: Salerno editrice, 1993.)


Spampanato, Vincenzo, 1933, 
Documenti della vita di Giordano
Bruno
, Florence: Olschki.




Other primary sources




Apian, Peter, 
Cosmographicus liber
, Landshut: Johann
Weyssenburger, 1524.


Agrippa von Nettesheim, Heinrich, 
De occulta philosophia libri
tres
, Cologne: Johannes Soter, 1533. Modern edition by Vittoria
Perrone Compagni, Leiden: Brill, 1992.


Aristotle, 
Metaphysics
, Greek text ed. and tr. Hugh
Tredennick, 2 vols, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press (Loeb
Classical Library), 1933–35. Bruno read the 
Metaphysics

in one or more of the available medieval or Renaissance Latin
versions.


–––, 
The Physics
, Greek text ed. and
tr. Philip H. Wicksteed and Francis M. Cornford, 2 vols, Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press (Loeb Classical Library), 1929–34.
Bruno read the 
Physics
 in one or more of the available
medieval or Renaissance Latin versions.


–––, 
Parts of Animals
, Greek text ed.
and tr. Arthur L. Peck, with Aristotle’s 
Movement of
Animals
 and 
Progression of Animals
, tr. Edward S.
Forster, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press (Loeb Classical
Library), 1937. Bruno read these two works in one or one or more of
the available medieval or Renaissance Latin versions.


Bible. Available online at the
 
BibleGateway

 website. English quotations in this entry are taken from the King
James Version in this SEP entry. Bruno used the Vulgate, also
available at the
 
BibleGateway

 website, and possibly other Latin versions of the Bible.


Brucker, Jakob Johann, 
Historia critica philosophiae a mundi
incunabulis ad nostram usque aetatem deducta
, 6 volumes, 2nd
edition, Leipzig: Wiedmann and Reichel, 1766–67. First edition,
Leipzig: Breitkopf, 1742–44.


Burckhardt, Jakob, 
Die Kultur der Renaissance in Italien
,
Basel: Schweighauser, 1860. English translation: 
The Civilization
of the Renaissance in Italy
, tr. S. G. C. Middlemore, introd.
Peter Burke, notes Peter Murray, London: Penguin Books, 1990.


Copernicus, Nicolaus, 
De revolutionibus orbium coelestium
libri VI
, Nuremberg: Johannes Petrejus, 1543. Bruno read either
this first edition or the second, 1566, edition published by Heinrich
Petri at Nuremberg. English translation: 
On the Revolutions
,
tr. and commentary Edward Rosen, London: Macmillan, 1978.


Dionysius the Areopagite, pseudo-, 
The Divine Names.

Composed in the late fifth or early sixth century AD. Translated in
pseudo-Dionysius,
 The Complete Works
, tr. Colm Luibheid,
London: SPCK, 1987, with contributions by other authors.


Diels, Hermann, and Kranz, Walther (eds), 
Die Fragmente der
Vorsokratiker
, 3 vols, Berlin: Weidmann, 1958.


Erasmus, Desiderius, 
De libero arbitrio diatribe sive
collatio
, Basel: Johann Froben, 1524. English translation:

Discourse on Free Will. Desiderius Erasmus and Martin Luther
,
tr. Ernst F. Winter, London: Bloomsbury Academic, 2013. The volume
includes an abridged translation of Luther’s 
De servo
arbitrio
, for which, see Luther, 1525.


Ficino, Marsilio, 
Theologia platonica
, Florence: Antonio
di Bartolommeo Miscomini, 1482. English translation, with the Latin
text: 
Platonic Theology
,  James Hankins and William Bowen (eds.),
and tr. Michael J. B. Allen and J. Warden, 6 volumes, Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press, 2001–06.


–––, 
Commentum in Philebum
, in
Ficino, 
Commentaria quinque perpetua in Platonem
, Florence:
Laurentius (Francisci) de Alopa, 1496. English translation, with the
Latin text: 
The Philebus Commentary
, ed. and tr. Michael J.
B. Allen, Berkeley: University of California Press, 1975.


–––, 
De sole
, first published, together
with Ficino’s 
De lumine
, Florence: Antonio di
Bartolommeo Miscomini, 1496. Italian translation: Marsilio Ficino,

Scritti sull’ astrologia
, tr. Ornella Pompeo Faracovi,
Milan: Biblioteca Universale Rizzoli, 1999. 


Franckenberg, Abraham von, 
Oculus sidereus
, Gdansk: Georg
Rheten, 1644.


Galilei, Galileo, 
Sidereus Nuncius
, Venice: Tommaso
Baglioni, 1610. English translation: 
Starry Messenger
, tr.
Stillman Drake, in 
Discoveries and Opinions of Galileo
,
together with translations of other works by Galileo Galilei, New
York: Doubleday, 1957.


Hasdale, Martin, [Letter to Galileo Galilei, dated 15 April,
1601], in Galileo Galilei, 
Le opere
, 20 vols in 21 pts,
Florence: Barbéra, 1929–39, vol. 10: 314–315.


Hermes Trismegistus (spurious author), 
Pimander
. English
translation: 
Hermetica. The Corpus hermeticum and the Latin
Asclepius
, tr., introd. and notes by Brian Copenhaver, Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 1992. The original Greek texts were
composed sometime in Egypt between the late first- and late
third-century AD. Bruno used Marsilio Ficino’s Latin translation
of the 
Pimander
, published for the first time at Treviso in
1471 and many times thereafter, and a Latin translation of the

Asclepius
, which was made “before the early fifth but
after the early fourth century [AD]” (Copenhaver, p.
xliii).


Iamblichus, 
De mysteriis
, Greek text, with an English
translation and notes, edited by Emma C. Clarke, John M. Dillon and
Jackson P. Hershbell, Leiden: Brill, 2004. Composed sometime between
280 and 305 AD. Bruno used Marsilio Ficino’s paraphrase,
published for the first time at Venice in 1497, together with other
Neoplatonic treatises, and many times thereafter.


Jacobi, Friedrich Heinrich, 
Ueber die Lehre des Spinoza in
Briefen an den Herrn Moses Mendelsohn
, Breslau: Gottlieb
Löwe, 1789. English translation: 
On the Doctrine of Spinoza
in Letters to Herr Moses Mendelssohn
, in Jacobi,

Philosophical Writings and the Novel Allwill
, tr. George di
Giovanni, Montreal and Kingston: McGill-Queen’s University
Press, 1994.


Lucretius, 
De rerum natura.
 Composed in the mid-first
century BC. Latin text with an English translation: 
On the Nature
of Things
, ed. and tr. W. H. D. Rouse, Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press (Loeb Classical Library), 1924.


Luther, Martin, 
De servo arbitrio
, Cologne: Hero Fuchs,
1525. Abridged English translation: 
The Bondage of the Will

in: Erasmus, 
Discourse on Free Will
, as above.


Mersenne, Marin, 
L’Impiété des
déistes
, Paris: Pierre Billaine, 1624. Modern edition: ed.
Dominique Descotes, Paris: H. Champion, 2005.


Pico della Mirandola, Gianfrancesco, 
Examen vanitatis
doctrinae gentium, veritatis christianae disciplinae
, Mirandola:
Giovanni Mazzocchi, 1520. Modern edition of the Latin text: ed.
Nikolas Egel, Hamburg: Felix Meiner, 2022. 


Plato, 
Republic
, Greek text ed. and tr. Paul Shorey, 2
vols, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press (Loeb Classical
Library), 1930–35. Bruno used Marsilio Ficino’s Latin
translation, which was first published in Ficino’s translation
of Plato’s works, together with the latter’s commentaries,
summaries and other matter related to Plato and the Platonic corpus,
at Florence: Laurentius (Francisci) de Alopa, 1484–85.


–––, 
Timaeus
, together with other works
by Plato, Greek texts ed. and English tr. Robert G. Bury, Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press (Loeb Classical Library), 1929. Bruno
used Marsilio Ficino’s Latin translation, as indicated in the
preceding entry.


Plotinus, [
Enneads
], Greek text ed. and tr. A. H.
Armstrong, 7 vols, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press (Loeb
Classical Library), 1966–88. Bruno used Marsilio Ficino’s
Latin translation and commentary, first published at Florence by
Antonio di Bartolommeo Miscomini in 1492, and several times in the
sixteenth century.


Proclus, 
Elements of Theology
, ed., tr. and commentary by
E. R. Dodds, 2nd ed., Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1963. A late
work; Proclus died in 485 AD.


Schelling, Friedrich Wilhelm Joseph, 
Bruno oder über das
göttliche und natürliche Prinzip der Dinge
, Berlin: J.
F. Unger, 1802. English translation: 
Bruno, or, On the Natural and
the Divine Principle of Things
, tr. Michael G. Vater, Albany:
State University of New York Press, 1984.


Thomas Aquinas; for information on works by Thomas cited in this
SEP entry, with guidance on editions and translations of them, see the
SEP entry for
 
Thomas Aquinas

 and the website
 
Thomas Aquinas in English

 maintained by Thérèse Bonin.


–––, 
Opera omnia
, vol. 1–, Rome:
Ex typographia polyglotta S. C. Propaganda Fide, 1882–.


–––, [
Disputed Questions about Truth.
]

Quaestiones disputatae de veritate
, in Thomas Aquinas,

Opera omnia
, vol. 22. Composed 1256–59. English
translation: 
Truth
, 3 vols, tr. Robert W. Mulligan, James V.
McGlynn and Robert W. Schmidt, Chicago: Henry Regnery, 1952–54.
Latin text
 
available online (Aquinas Institute)
,
 with th English translation by Mulligan, MacGlynn and Schmidt, under
the
 title
 Disputed Questions about Truth
.


–––, 
Scriptum super libros Sententiarum
magistri Petri Lombardi
 (incomplete), 4 vols, Pierre
Mandonnet and M. Fabien Moos (eds.), Paris: P. Lethielleux, 1929–47.
Composed 1252–1256. The Latin text of the complete work,
together with an English translation of Book 4, distinctions 1–3, by
Beth Mortensen, is
 
available online (Aquinas Institute)
.


–––, 
Summa theologiae
, with the
commentary of Tommaso de Vio (Cardinal Cajetan), in Thomas Aquinas,

Opera omnia
, as above, vols 4–12. The

Summa
 was composed between 1267 and 1273, but remained
unfinished at Thomas’s death in 1274. The Latin text with an
English translation by Laurence Shapcote is
 
available online (Aquinas Institute)
.


–––, 
Super primum[–secundam] epistolam
ad Corinthios lectura
, in: Thomas Aquinas, 
Super Epistolas S.
Pauli lectura
, ed. Raffaele Cai, 8th revised ed., Turin:
Marietti, 1953. The Latin text with an English translation by Fabian
R. Larcher and Matthew Lamb is
 
available online (Aquinas Institute)
.


–––, 
Super librum De causis expositio
,
ed. H. D. Saffrey, Fribourg and Louvain, Société
philosophique, 1954. The Latin text with an English translation (of
unspecified authorship) is
 
available online (Aquinas Institute)
.
 Composed c. 1272.


–––, 
Expositio Libri Physicorum
, in:
Thomas Aquinas 
Opera omnia
 (as above), vol. 2. Composed
1268–1270. English translation: 
Commentary on
Aristotle’s Physics
, tr. Richard J. Blackwell, Richard J.
Spath, W. Edmund Thirlkel and Pierre H. Conway, New Haven: Yale
University Press, 1963; reprinted: Notre Dame, IN: Dumb Ox Books,
1999. The Latin text with this English translation is
 
available online (Aquinas Institute)
.


–––, 
De principiis naturae
 (
On the
Principles of Nature
), in Thomas Aquinas, 
Opera omnia
,
vol. 43. Composed c. 1255. English translation: Joseph Bobik,

Aquinas on Matter and Form and the Elements. A Translation and
Interpretation of the 
De principiis naturae

and the 
De mixtione elementorum
 of St.
Thomas Aquinas
, Notre Dame, IN: University of Notre Dame Press,
1998. The Latin text with an English translation by Roman A. Kocourek
is
 
available online (Aquinas Institute)
.


Veyssière de Lacroze, Mathurin, 
Entretiens sur divers
sujets d’histoire, de littérature, de religion et de
critique
, Cologne: Pierre Marteau, 1711.


Virgil, [Works, including the 
Aeneid
], Latin texts ed.,
with English tr. H. Ruston Fairclough, 2 vols, Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press (Loeb Classical Library), 1918–26. Virgil died
in 19 BC, before completing his revision of the 
Aeneid
.




Secondary Literature


Studies cited in this entry and selected studies




Aquilecchia, Giovanni, 1995, “Giordano Bruno in Inghilterra
(1583–1585). Documenti e testimonianze”, 
Bruniana
& Campanelliana
, 1: 21–42.


–––, 2001, 
Giordano Bruno
, Turin. (A
revised version of the 1971 edition, also published as an entry to the

Dizionario biografico degli italiani
, vol. 14 (1972).
 [
Aquilecchia 2001 available on line
].
 Based on a careful reading of the available documentation and free of
the supposition that colours many biographies.)


Blum, Paul Richard, 2012, 
Giordano Bruno. An
Introduction
, Amsterdam: Rodopi. (Recommended for those
unfamiliar with Bruno’s life and works.)


Brown, Stuart, 2002, “Monadology and the Reception of Bruno
in the Young Leibniz”, in Gatti 2002, 381–404.


Canone, Eugenio, and others, 2000, 
Giordano Bruno
1548–1600. Mostra storico documentaria, Roma, Biblioteca
Casanatense, 7 giugno–30 settembre 2000
, Florence: L.S.
Olschki. (A visual tour of Bruno’s life and works.)


Del Prete, Antonella. 2023. “À la croisée de
traditions différentes. Giordano Bruno et la doctrine des
éléments”, in 
De mundi recentioribus
phænomenis. Cosmologie et science dans l’Europe des Temps
modernes. XVe-XVIIe siècles, essais en l’honneur de
Miguel Ángel Granada
, E. Mehl and I. Pantin (eds.),
Turnhout: Brepols.


Gatti, Hilary (ed.), 2002, 
Giordano Bruno. Philosopher of the
Renaissance
, Ashgate: Aldershot, 381–404.


Gatti, Hilary, 2011, 
Essays on Giordano Bruno
, Princeton:
Princeton University Press.


Granada, Miguel Ángel, 1990, “L’interpretazione
bruniana di Copernico e la 
Narratio prima
 di Rheticus”,

Rinascimento
, 30: 343–365.


––– 1994, “Il rifiuto della distinzione
fra 
potentia absoluta
 e 
potentia ordinata
 di Dio e
l’affermazione dell’universo infinito in Giordano
Bruno”, 
Rivista di storia della filosofia
, 49:
495–532.


–––, 2000, “‘Voi siete dissolubili,
ma non vi dissolverete’. Il problema della dissoluzione dei
mondi in Giordano Bruno”, 
Paradigmi
, 18:
261–289.


–––, 2005, 
La reivindicación de la
filosofía en Giordano Bruno
. Barcelona: Herder.


–––, 2008, “Kepler and Bruno on the
Infinity of the Universe and of Solar Systems”, 
Journal of
the History of Astronomy
, 39: 469–495.


–––, 2020, “Libro I. La relazione
Dio/mondo e la necessità dell’universo infinito”,
in Granada and Tessicini, 2020, 47–69.


Granada, Miguel Ángel, and Tessicini, Dario (eds), 2020,

Il
 De immenso 
di Giordano Bruno. Letture critiche
,
Pisa: Serra editore.


Knox, Dilwyn, 2002, “Bruno’s Doctrine of Gravity,
Levity and Natural Circular Motion”, 
Physis
,
38:171–209.


–––, 2013. “Bruno: Immanence and
Transcendence in 
De la causa, principio et uno
, Dialogue
II”, 
Bruniana & Campanelliana
, 19:
463–482.


–––, 2020a. “
De immenso
 II. La
perfezione dell’universo”, in Granada and Tessicini, 2020,
71–102.


–––, 2020b. “Wonder and the
Philosopher’s Perfection: Giordano Bruno”, in Francesca
Bugliani Knox and Jennifer Reek (eds) 
Poetry, Philosophy and
Theology in Conversation. Thresholds of Wonder
, London,
Routledge. Pp. 29–49.


–––, 2020c. “The World Soul and Individual
Souls. Two Notes on Giordano Bruno’s 
Lampas XXX
statuarum
”, in 
From Wittenberg to Rome, and Beyond.
Giordano Bruno: Will, Power, and Being. Law, Philosophy, and Theology
in the Early Modern Era
, ed. M. Traversino, Paris, Garnier.


Lai, Tyrone, 1973, “Nicholas of Cusa and the Finite
Universe”, 
Journal of the History of Philosophy
,
11:161–167.


McFarland, Thomas, 1969, 
Coleridge and the Pantheist
Tradition
, Oxford: Clarendon.


Michel, Paul-Henri, 1962, 
La Cosmologie de Giordano
Bruno
, Paris: Hermann. Translated as 
The Cosmology of
Giordano Bruno
, R.E.W. Maddison (trans.), Paris: Hermann,
1973.


Nadler, Steven, 2016, “Baruch Spinoza”, 
The
Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy
 (Fall 2016 Edition), Edward
N. Zalta (ed.). URL =
 <
https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/fall2016/entries/spinoza/
>


Namer, Emile, 1926, 
Les Aspects de Dieu dans la philosophie de
Giordano Bruno
, Paris: F. Alcan.


–––, 1968, 
Giordano Bruno ou l’univers
infini comme fondement de la philosophie moderne
, Paris:
Seghers.


Nelson, John Charles, 1958, 
Renaissance Theory of Love. The
Context of Giordano Bruno’s
 Eroici furori. New York:
Columbia University Press.


Papi, Fulvio, 1968, 
Antropologia e civiltà nel pensiero
di Giordano Bruno
, Florence: La Nuova Italia.


Ricci, Saverio, 1990, 
La fortuna del pensiero di Giordano
Bruno, 1600–1750
, Florence: Le Lettere.


–––, 2000, 
Giordano Bruno nell’Europa
del Cinquecento
, Rome: Salerno.


–––, 2009, 
Dal Brunus redivivus al Bruno
degli italiani. Metamorfosi della nolana filosofia tra sette e
ottocento
, Rome: Edizioni di storia e letteratura.


–––, 2104, “Le procès de Giordano
Bruno par l’Inquisition”, 
Lexicon Philosophicum
,
2: 97–125.
 [
Ricci 2014 available online
]


Rowland, Ingrid D., 2008, 
Giordano Bruno, Philosopher,
Heretic
, New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux. (Recommended for
those unfamiliar with Bruno’s life and works.)


Segonds, A.–P., 2000, “Notes”; see Firpo
2000.


Spruit, Leen, 1988, 
Il problema della conoscenza in Giordano
Bruno
, Naples: Bibliopolis.


–––, 1989, “Motivi peripatetici nella
gnoseologia bruniana dei dialoghi italiani”, 
Verifiche
,
18: 367–400.


Sturlese, Rita, 1987. “‘Et Nolanus vivat, recipiatur,
adoretur’. Le note del ‘Postillatore napoletano’ al
dialogo 
De l’infinito
 di Giordano Bruno”, in

Scritti in onore di Eugenio Garin
, Pisa: Scuola Normale
Superiore, Pisa. Pp. 117–128.


–––, 1994, “Le fonti del Sigillus
sigillorum del Bruno, ossia: il confronto con Ficino a Oxford
sull’anima humana”, 
Nouvelles de la République
des Lettres
, 13: 89–167.


Tessicini, Dario, 2007, 
I dintorni dell’infinito.
Giordano Bruno e l’astronomia del Cinquecento
, Pisa, Rome:
F. Serra. (Valuable for an understanding of what Bruno did and did not
understand about astronomy.)


Védrine, Hélène, 1967, 
La Conception de
la nature chez Giordano Bruno
, second edition, Paris: J.
Vrin.


Yates, Frances A., 1964, 
Giordano Bruno and the Hermetic
Tradition
, London: Routledge. (Readable, informative, even if the
overall interpretation is flawed.)




Bibliographies (ordered chronologically)




Salvestrini, Virgilio, 1958, 
Bibliografia di Giordano Bruno
(1582–1950)
, second revised edition by Luigi Firpo,
Florence: Sansoni.


Severini, Maria Elena, 2002, 
Bibliografia di Giordano Bruno,
1951–2000
, Sussidi eruditi, 58, Rome: Edizioni di storia e
letteratura.


Figorilli, Maria Cristina, 2003, 
Per una bibliografia di
Giordano Bruno, 1800–1999
, Paris: Belles lettres.


Gatti, Hilary, ‘Giordano Bruno’, first instantiation
2104, regularly updated thereafter, in the 
Oxford
Bibliographies
 online resource; accessible by subscription
only.




Additional Resources




Canone, Eugenio, and Ernst, Germana (eds), 1995–,

Bruniana & Campanelliana
, Pisa, 1–. (A journal
dedicated to Bruno and Campanella.)


––– (eds), 2006–, 
Enciclopedia
bruniana & campanelliana
, 1–, Pisa, Rome: F. Serra.
(Scholarly entries on concepts and persons mentioned by Bruno and
Tommaso Campanella.)


Ciliberto, Michele (ed.), 2014, 
Giordano Bruno. Parole,
concetti, immagini
, 3 volumes, Pisa: Edizioni della Normale.
(Contains entries, with bibliographies, on most aspects of
Bruno’s thought; especially helpful for authors relating to its
reception.)








Academic Tools










How to cite this entry
.








Preview the PDF version of this entry
 at the
 
Friends of the SEP Society
.








Look up topics and thinkers related to this entry

 at the Internet Philosophy Ontology Project (InPhO).








Enhanced bibliography for this entry

at 
PhilPapers
, with links to its database.












Other Internet Resources




Archivio Giordano Bruno
,
 in the
 
Archivio dei filosofi italiani
,
 principal editor Eugenio Canone. A major resource for the study of
Bruno, hosted by the Istituto per il Lessico Intellettuale Europeo e
Storia delle Idee, that will, when complete, offer downloadable
pre-twentieth-century editions of Bruno’s works, reproductions
of documents and manuscripts, a detailed chronology of Bruno’s
life, scholarly studies on aspects of his life and works, a
bibliography and other materials.


La biblioteca ideale di Giordano Bruno. Le opere e le fonti
.
 Searchable versions of Bruno’s Latin and Italian works, indices
of his Italian and Latin works and of sources used in them.


BIVIO: Biblioteca Virtuale On-Line
.


Bibliotheca bruniana electronica. The Complete Works of Giordano Bruno. Sources—Studies—Biographies—Varia
.
 Warburg Institute, London. The site has downloadable PDF files of
editions of Bruno’s works and scholarly studies in various
languages.


Early English Books Online
 (EEBO).

 Digital reproductions of the 1583–85 editions of Bruno’s
Italian dialogues and his 
Ars reminiscendi
.








Related Entries




Agrippa von Nettesheim, Heinrich Cornelius
 |
 
Aristotle
 |
 
condemnation of 1277
 |
 
Copernicus, Nicolaus
 |
 
Cusanus, Nicolaus [Nicolas of Cusa]
 |
 
Erasmus, Desiderius
 |
 
Ficino, Marsilio
 |
 
Heraclitus
 |
 
Ibn Gabirol, Solomon [Avicebron]
 |
 
Ibn Rushd [Averroes]
 |
 
Ibn Sina [Avicenna]
 |
 
Lucretius
 |
 
Machiavelli, Niccolò
 |
 
panpsychism
 |
 
pantheism
 |
 
Parmenides
 |
 
Patrizi, Francesco
 |
 
Plato
 |
 
Plotinus
 |
 
Pomponazzi, Pietro
 |
 
Pythagoras
 |
 
Spinoza, Baruch








Acknowledgments



My thanks to Leen Spruit for his comments on, and corrections to, the
pre-publication version of this entry; Dario Tessicini for his advice
about Bruno’s cometary theory; Hilary Gatti for her comments on
Bruno’s insistence on the importance of the senses and
observation; Ovanes Okopyan for the section on Soviet interpretations
of Bruno; Valentina Zaffino for her various suggestions; the anonymous
SEP reviewer for supplying the reference to the “dark”
Heraclitus; and Ada Bronowski for her suggestion that
Lucretius’s 
simulacra
 inspired, at least in part,
Bruno’s theory that cosmic bodies emitted and absorbed stray
particles.








 






Copyright © 2024
 by



Dilwyn Knox
<
d
.
knox
@
ucl
.
ac
.
uk
>
    




 









  Open access to the SEP is made possible by a world-wide funding initiative.

  Please Read How You Can Help Support the Growth and Development of the Encyclopedia




 

