











 
 Entry Navigation 






Entry Contents


Bibliography


Academic Tools


Friends PDF Preview 


Author and Citation Info 
 


Back to Top 


























Constructivism in Political Philosophy
First published Tue Feb 6, 2024






Political constructivism
 is a metaphorical term implying some
resemblance between political morality and artificial,
“constructed”, objects. To elaborate the resemblance,
constructivists might suggest that political morality is an 
actual
artifact
, akin to a purposely designed set of legal and social
norms. This suggestion, however, sits uneasily with the naive
conviction that sound moral principles are 
discovered
 rather
than merely 
invented
. Constructivists might instead suggest
that various political principles have features that some designer

would
 select and apply the analogy only to some rather than
the whole of political morality. This entry focuses on the views of
John Rawls, which favor this more complex 
hypothetical
 and

restrictive
 interpretation.



The doctrine of political constructivism is present in John
Rawls’s 
A Theory of Justice
 (1971, 1999a) and developed
more explicitly in Rawls’s later work, including his 
Dewey
Lectures
 (Rawls 1980, 1999b: ch. 16; James 2014; Krasnoff 2014;
Laden 2014) and second book, 
Political Liberalism
 (Rawls
1993, 1996, 2005: Lecture III). There are non-Rawlsian forms of
political constructivism (Barry 1995; Forst 2011) and

constructivism
 is also used to designate positions in
philosophy of mathematics (Bridges & Palmgren 2013) and
meta-ethics (Bagnoli 2013 & 2022; Enoch 2009; Fitzpatrick 2005;
Korsgaard 1996, 2003 [2008]; Hussain & Shah 2006; Lenman &
Shemmer 2012; Scanlon 2012; Street 2008, 2010; Wedgwood 2002). Largely
setting aside these alternatives, here the term

constructivism
 will refer to one “view about the
structure and content of a political conception” (Rawls 1993:
89) present within Rawls’s thought.



Rawls’s political constructivism claims that various sound
action-guiding political principles resemble artifacts insofar as they
can be “represented” as if they were produced by some
imaginary agents who undertake a “procedure of
construction” that validates those principles (Rawls 1993: 93,
and cp. Rawls 1999a: 40). Furthermore, Rawls affirms a restrictive
rather than inclusive form of constructivism, which claims that the
artificial element within political morality does not exhaust its
content let alone the entire moral, evaluative, or normative domain.
As he puts it,





not everything…is constructed; we must have some material, as
it were, from which to begin. In a more literal sense, 
only the
substantive principles specifying the content of political right and
justice are constructed
. The procedure itself is simply laid out
using as starting points the basic conceptions of society and person,
the principles of practical reason, and the public role of a political
conception of justice. (Rawls 1993: 104; italics added)





(See also Scanlon 2014: 90–104 for a 
contractualist

version of constructivism that is less restrictive insofar as it
extends beyond political morality but still non-inclusive because in
doing so it relies on prior non-constructed claims about sound
normative reasons.)



The following sections attempt to explain and assess these statements,
and other core constructivist claims. The former explanatory task is
particularly urgent. In 1980, referring to a main forerunner to
political constructivism, and comparing it to 
intuitionism

and 
utilitarianism
, Rawls observed that a





proper understanding of Kantian constructivism, on a par with our
grasp of these views, is still to be achieved. (Rawls 1980 [1999]: 556
[343])





Many years later, the same is true of political constructivism: the
proposal that political principles are in some sense artificial and
Rawls’s more specific claims about constructed principles,
constructive procedures, and non-constructed material all remain
elusive ideas, and there is no clear and shared characterization of
the doctrine.



Sections 1 and 2 outline Rawls’s analogy regarding the
artificial character of political morality. They do so by describing
two characteristic features of constructivism, namely (i) the role the
doctrine attaches to procedurally grounded principles in determining
some of our reasons for action, and (ii) its reliance on certain types
of non-constructed foundational ideal. Turning to the implications
Rawls draws from his view of the 
public role
 of political
principles, Sections 3 and 4 then examine a third important
characteristic, namely (iii) the “political” dimension of
constructivism and in particular (iv) the doctrine’s restricted
scope and ambition to be consistent with several rival meta-ethical
positions. Sections 5, 6, and 7 conclude by outlining the appeal of
constructivism, one of its puzzling features, and various criticisms
advanced by its leading opponent, G. A. Cohen, and others.










1. Reasons, Principles, and Procedures


2. Political Constructivism and Justice as Fairness


3. Why Constructivism Became “Political”


4. Rational Intuitionism, Moral Constructivism, and Political Constructivism


5. The Appeal of Political Constructivism


6. The Practical Conception of Justification


7. Against Political Constructivism




7.1 The Fact-Dependency Objection


7.2 The Alien Factors Objection


7.3 The Harmless Injustice Objection


 


8. Conclusion


Bibliography


Academic Tools


Other Internet Resources


Related Entries












1. Reasons, Principles, and Procedures



The aim of political constructivism is to explain why particular
empirical facts are “right-and-wrong-making
characteristics” that determine whether “an action or
institution is…right or wrong, or just or unjust” (Rawls
1993: 121) and provide sound reasons for political action. The
doctrine’s primary purpose, then, is to identify what makes it
the case that objects possess certain moral and normative properties
rather than what justifies belief in their possession of those
properties. Thus construed, constructivism is a distinctive general
position within one branch of 
normative ethics
, normative
political theory. When it comes to epistemology, Rawls takes for
granted that constructivists assume justification involves coherence
between considered convictions at various levels of generality, a
commitment to the doctrine of 
reflective equilibrium
 he
regards as common ground between exponents of many moral and non-moral
theories (Rawls 1993: 95; Scanlon 2003: 140–53; Kelly &
McGrath 2010; Daniels 2013; McGrath 2019: Ch. 2)



Various rival political theories, ranging from Hobbesian
contractarianism to agent-neutral consequentialism, all share the same
explanatory ambition as constructivism. What distinguishes
constructivism is the explanation it gives for the structure and
content of political morality. More specifically, constructivism
involves a “conjecture” (Rawls 1993: 96; Rawls 1999a: 305)
that certain principles are sound because they can be represented as
the outcome of the relevant construction procedure; for example, the

original position
, in Rawls’s favored version of
constructivism, 
justice as fairness
.



Before analyzing the constructivist conjecture in more detail, note
first that in Rawls’s initial discussion of constructivism he
states the conjecture in a way that implies the normative status of
certain facts derives 
solely
 from prior principles and yet
more fundamental procedures. Thus, the 1980 
Dewey Lectures
 on
“Kantian Constructivism in Moral Theory” contain the
striking claim that an





essential feature of a constructivist view…is that its first
principles single out what facts…citizens are to count as
reasons of justice. 
Apart from the procedure of constructing these
principles, there are no reasons of justice
 and what their
relative force is can be ascertained 
only
 on the basis of
principles that result from the construction. (Rawls 1999a: 351,
italics added, and cp. 307 and 354)





Here the italicized phrase suggests that some basis in constructed
principles is not merely sufficient for facts to constitute reasons of
justice but essential since that basis provides the only plausible
account of what makes facts into such reasons. (See also Rawls 2000:
246, where Rawls states that the “idea of constructivism is
that, apart from a reasonable constructivist conception, facts are
simply facts”.)



In his later chapter on “Political Constructivism”,
however, Rawls expresses a less ambitious version of the conjecture
and suggests merely that derivation from principles validated by a
constructive procedure is sufficient. As he explains,





the political constructivist regards a judgment as correct because it
issues from the reasonable and rational procedure of construction when
correctly formulated and correctly followed (assuming, as always, that
the judgment relies on true information. (Rawls 1993: 96)





Rawls leaves unanswered, however, the question of whether what makes
the relevant judgments sound is 
exhausted
 by procedural
grounds, and explicitly avoids reliance on the Kantian view of
“constitutive autonomy”, which claims





the order of moral and political values must be made, or itself
constituted, by the principles and conceptions of practical reason.
(Rawls 1993: 99)





For reasons related to the “political” character of
constructivism, discussed in
 
Section 3
,
 I shall assume that the less ambitious version represents
Rawls’s considered construal of the constructivist
conjecture.



Regardless of whether it takes a more or a less ambitious form, we can
analyze the constructivist conjecture as affirming at least the
following two core claims.




Some facts provide sound reasons for action because justified
moral principles confer that positive normative status on those
facts.


Some sound moral principles can confer positive normative status
on facts because those principles are validated by an appropriate
procedural test.





Of course, many non-constructivists recognize 
some

relationship between principles and agents’ reasons for action.
They claim, for instance, that principles summarize our reasons or
perform useful heuristic or strategic functions by enabling us to
better identify or conform to our reasons. As a result, it is possible
to assume that the first core claim is commonplace. The same risk
applies to the second core claim unless the distinction between
procedural and non-procedural tests is stated more clearly. To address
these problems, and more fully understand the notions of
status-conferral and procedural validation, it is worth noting some
contrasts between constructivism and two further doctrines about what
makes certain facts provide sound moral reasons and what justifies
procedural tests, namely 
rational intuitionism
 and

consequentialism
.



Drawing the first contrast, Rawls writes that





the intuitionist regards a procedure as correct because following it
correctly usually gives the correct 
independently given

judgment, whereas the political constructivist regards a judgment as
correct 
because
 it issues from the reasonable and rational
procedure of construction…. (Rawls 1993: 96, italics added)





Rawls’s remark brings out the non-derivative importance that
constructivism characteristically attaches to more general procedures
and principles in relation to propositions about specific reasons. The
doctrine does not claim that principles merely have instrumental value
in relation to facts that constitute sound reasons prior to procedures
and principles. It claims instead that for some of the normative
domain they play a non-instrumental role by in part making it the case
that certain facts constitute reasons for action (cp. McKeever &
Ridge 2006: 12–14).



In affirming the generative role of procedurally-based principles in
constituting part of the normative domain the constructivist makes a
claim which is far from commonplace. As a result, some critics might
regard constructivism as implausibly inverting the appropriate order
of explanation between truths about reasons and principles. To express
their puzzlement, they might ask “How can a principle ever make
a fact into a reason?”



On reflection, however, the constructivist’s distinctive
explanatory strategy is less puzzling than might first appear to be
the case. To understand why, note that if legal institutions can
possess 
legitimate political authority
, then legislated
principles may confer normative status on facts that otherwise might
not constitute reasons for action. Furthermore, legislation performs
this role in virtue of its procedural pedigree rather than its content
alone (Raz 1986: Part I). For example, many, if not all, motorists
accept that local speed regulations should make a difference to the
reasons that bear on their driving decisions, and they do so because
of the source of regulations rather than because of their
non-procedural virtues. Endorsing a structurally similar view,
constructivists claim that some political reasons are also artifacts
in the sense that their validity derives from prior principles which,
in turn, derive their validity from yet more basic constructive
procedures.



Although the comparison with legal reasons is instructive, it is
nevertheless worth bearing in mind that there are limits on the extent
to which constructivism claims that political reasons resemble legal
reasons. As we have noted, the constructivist does not claim that
political reasons are as heavily dependent as legal reasons on

actual
 legislative activity and other types of contingent
social facts.



The first core claim that certain principles can make facts constitute
sound reasons for action does not uniquely differentiate
constructivism since various non-constructivist views claim that
principles can confer normative status. For example, various indirect
forms of consequentialism (Johnson 1991; Hooker 2000) also assume that
certain types of moral principle, usually including the prohibitions
present in common-sense morality, play an indispensable role in
determining our reasons for action. To explain what makes specific
principles play this role, indirect consequentialists appeal
ultimately to their tendency to promote valuable outcomes when
internalized by relevant individuals or groups. We can further
differentiate constructivism by noting that its second core claim
assumes that the value of outcomes is not what ultimately matters when
explaining the status-conferring power of the specific principles it
focusses on. Constructivists instead appeal to validity conferring
constructive procedures rather than value-promotion to explain why
some specific principles are better grounded than others.



Unfortunately, Rawls does not state any general criterion to
differentiate constructive procedures from non-procedural tests for
the soundness of principles. It is not completely clear, for example,
whether the very general process involved in human beings making their
evaluative and normative attitudes coherent by securing reflective
equilibrium might qualify as a constructive procedure in his view.
This unclarity may be part of the explanation of why the label
“constructivism” is now used in several very different
ways within practical philosophy and encompasses prominent Kantian and
Humean variants (Korsgaard 2003 [2008]; Street 2010 & 2012). Rawls
does, however, make relevant remarks that restrict the types of
constructive procedure characteristic of his own political
constructivism, and in particular the types of consideration from
which their capacity to validate principles derives. He also remarks
on how his own theory of 
justice as fairness
 is one version
of constructivism. We now examine how these remarks illuminate
constructivism.


2. Political Constructivism and Justice as Fairness



Recall that Rawls emphasizes that only some of the elements within a
constructivist view resemble artifacts, namely various principles of
political morality, including ones stating what 
social
justice
 requires. As Rawls explains, contrasting such principles
with certain ideals and other types of practical principle,





not everything, then, is constructed; we must have some material, as
it were, from which to begin. In a more literal sense, only the
substantive principles specifying [the] content of political right and
justice are constructed. The procedure itself is simply 
laid
out
 using as starting points the basic conceptions of society and
person, the principles of practical reason, and the public role of a
political conception of justice. (Rawls 1993: 104, cp. 108)





Rawls’s remark highlights the second characteristic feature of
constructivism, which concerns the substantive content of the doctrine
rather than its structure. Here the main notable feature is the
fundamental role that constructivism affords to specific
non-constructed considerations in determining which constructive
procedure is suitable. According to Rawls’s explicit definition
(Rawls 1993: 93–94), these include underlying ideals of the
citizen, society, and practical reasonableness and rationality.



For illustration, consider how Rawls’s own theory of justice as
fairness assumes citizens have the 
twin moral powers
 involved
in having a sense of justice and a capacity rationally to form,
revise, and pursue a conception of the good as well as associated
interests in developing and exercising those powers (Rawls 1993:
103–4). In addition to this conception of the individual, the
theory relies upon an associational ideal of 
well-ordered social
cooperation
 according to widely shared public rules. These
non-constructed assumptions lend support to Rawls’s favored
procedural test on principles of social justice, which famously
appeals to hypothetical agreement in a so-called 
original
position
 (Hinton 2015).



Employing the test, Rawls asks how mutually disinterested rational
representatives of prospective citizens would rank competing
principles of justice when fairly situated behind a 
veil of
ignorance
 that robs them of any knowledge about the personal
characteristics of the specific individuals they are assumed to
represent, as well as the concrete conceptions of the good that are
affirmed by those individuals. Rawls’s answer proceeds via two
stages as each representative initially assesses principles by
reference to the interests of the individual she represents and then
subsequently focuses on the more general issue of a principle’s
capacity, once instituted, to facilitate well-ordered social
cooperation by shaping individuals so they share, and are normally
moved by, the same sense of justice (Rawls 2001: Part III).



While Rawls’s own favored procedure involves citizens’
representatives who are fairly situated behind the veil of ignorance,
it is worth noting that Rawls allows that constructivists might appeal
to quite different procedures to explain how principles are
constructed on the basis of non-constructed assumptions. Referring to
various authors including T. M. Scanlon, Ronald Dworkin, Onora
O’Neill, Brian Barry, and David Brink, Rawls writes that





only Scanlon and Barry understand constructivism as I do, although
their constructivisms are different. (Rawls 1993: 91, n.
 1)
[
1
]





Here Rawls alludes to the fact that the 
reasonable rejection
test
 central to Scanlon’s contractualism (Scanlon 1982,
1999), and later adopted by Barry (1995), also qualifies as a
constructive procedure. The reasonable rejection test states that





an act is wrong if its performance under the circumstances would be
disallowed by any set of principles for the general regulation of
behaviour that no one could reasonably reject as a basis for informed,
unforced, general agreement. (Scanlon 1999: 153)





Unlike Rawls’s original position test, Scanlon’s test
involves no assumption of partial motivation or any use of a veil of
ignorance to avert unfair effects. Instead, Scanlon’s test
assumes each agent shares the same concern to identify principles
immune to reasonable rejection. Moreover, Scanlon applies his test to
principles of interpersonal obligation in general whereas Rawls does
not assume his original position test applies beyond political
morality. The differences between Rawls’s and Scanlon’s
tests are therefore readily apparent. It is less apparent, however,
what features such tests must possess for them to qualify as the types
of procedure characteristic of a constructivist view in Rawls’s
sense of this expression. One possibility is that the tests assume
that principles have a 
social role
, and so their validity
derives in part from their functional properties when put into
practice. We later return to this possibility and the criticisms it
provokes but now turn to the non-comprehensive character of
constructivism.


3. Why Constructivism Became “Political”



Many find it natural to assume that “in principle all moral
reasons are fair game for governmental action” (Raz 1989: 1230).
Those tempted to assume that politics may legitimately be based on the
whole truth face an interesting problem if they are also drawn to
Rawls’s ideals of free and equal citizenship and well-ordered
social cooperation, and his account of their implications.



To understand the structure of the problem bear in mind that
Rawls’s conception of citizens’ needs supports the
conclusion that any fully just society will attach great weight to
protecting the expressive and associative liberties we need to develop
and exercise our moral powers. In addition, recall that Rawls’s
ideal of the well-ordered society depends upon its members achieving
social unity through regulating their more fundamental political
decisions by a family of values that are widely accepted in the
societies they regulate.



A notable conflict now arises if, as Rawls plausibly assumes, the
protection of civil liberties within modern societies is inevitably
accompanied by the 
fact of reasonable pluralism
 (Rawls 1993:
36–39), and thus many people of good will nevertheless fail to
recognize which reasons apply across many areas of ethics, and
religious and philosophical discourse. For under these conditions of
persistent disagreement, it is impossible jointly to realize three
aspirations each of which has some genuine appeal: we cannot
simultaneously protect civil liberties, enjoy social unity through our
political activities, and govern those activities by the whole
truth.



Rawls’s own response to what might be called the 
liberal
trilemma
 is to insist upon the priority of liberty and then to
hope that the value of social unity, even if only 
pro tanto

rather than absolute (Rawls 2005: 386), is normally of sufficient
importance to defeat any conflicting values realized by acting from
the whole truth. It is against this background that the third major
characteristic of Rawls’s favored political form of
constructivism, namely its non-comprehensive nature, is best
understood (Clayton 1999; Freeman 2007; Lister 2013; Quong 2010a;
Quong 2014; Weithman 2010).



Explaining the source of the doctrine’s “political”
character, Rawls writes that





it is only by affirming a constructivist conception—one which is
political not metaphysical—that citizens can generally expect to
find principles that all can accept. This they can do without denying
the deeper aspects of their reasonable comprehensive doctrines.

Given their differences, citizens cannot fulfill in any other way
their…desire to have a shared political life acceptable to
others as free and equal
. (Rawls 1993: 98, italics added; Rawls
2000: 329)





As Rawls explains here, in pursuit of a valuable form of normative
consensus, political constructivists try to duck many important
philosophical questions. Thus, Rawls adds that





This idea of a shared political life does not invoke Kant’s idea
of autonomy, or Mill’s idea of individuality, as moral values
belonging to a comprehensive doctrine. The appeal is rather to the
political value of public life conducted on terms that all reasonable
citizens can accept as fair. (Rawls 1993: 98)





The use of the “method of avoidance” is most apparent in
Rawls’s conception of citizens deliberating on the basis of a
subset of reasons, which govern certain political decisions but are
not claimed to extend more comprehensively. It is also apparent in the
constructivist’s attempt to make only minimal claims about the
respects in which their political judgments are successful or have
what Rawls terms an “objective” status, to which the next
section now turns.


4. Rational Intuitionism, Moral Constructivism, and Political Constructivism



In addressing the issue of the objectivity of judgments about
political morality, Rawls first outlines several “widely
recognized essentials” (Rawls 1993: 110 n. 16, and
110–112) which he implies any adequate conception of an
objectively successful moral judgment must affirm. Roughly stated,
these essentials include recognizing that genuinely objective
judgments do not merely voice psychological states but are




supported by reasons and warrant inferences, and


aspire to satisfy some standard of correctness.





In addition, Rawls claims that any adequate conception of objectively
successful judgments must




assign reasons to agents and provide some ordering when
reasons conflict,


acknowledge a distinction between judgments being
correct and merely appearing correct, and


provide an account of how agents might arrive at the
same or similar judgments.





Discussing (ii) and (iv) respectively, for example, Rawls writes that
it





is definitive of judgment (moral or otherwise) that it aims at being
reasonable, or true, as the case may be





and that it is





part of understanding the concept of objectivity that we never suppose
that our thinking something is just or reasonable, or a group’s
thinking it so, makes it so. (Rawls 1993: 111)





Rawls’s strategy in explaining the political constructivist
conception of objectivity is to claim that it satisfies these minimal
conditions (Rawls 1993: 114–116) and, in addition, does not
affirm or contradict two mutually opposed and more comprehensive
conceptions of objective success.



One such comprehensive conception is the form of moral realism that
Rawls labels 
rational intuitionism
, and attributes to Samuel
Clarke, Richard Price, Henry Sidgwick, and W. D. Ross (Rawls 1993: 91;
Rawls 2000: 72, 235–237). According to Rawls, rational
intuitionism claims that





moral principles and judgments, when correct, are true statements
about an independent order of moral values…[that] does not
depend on, nor is it to be explained by, the activity of any (human)
minds…. (Rawls 1993: 91)





The other conception is 
moral constructivism
, a comprehensive
doctrine Rawls attributes to Kant (Rawls 2000: 235–252). On
Rawls’s reading, Kant’s moral constructivism claims
that





a correct moral judgment is one that meets all the relevant criteria
of reasonableness and rationality incorporated into the categorical
imperative procedure for testing maxims. (Rawls 1993: 114)





Insofar as they both assume that procedures play a validating role,
moral constructivism and political constructivism are structurally
similar.



There are, however, at least two respects in which moral
constructivists make far more ambitious claims than political
constructivists. They claim that the alleged priority of procedures
applies to 
all
 moral judgments rather than relying only on a
claim about judgments within political morality. Furthermore, they

oppose
 intuitionist accounts of what makes moral judgments
correct because such accounts appeal to normative facts that are prior
to and independent of our self-conception.



Here it is worth noting that, as Rawls reads Kant’s moral
constructivism, Kant does not merely deny the existence of such prior
and independent facts. In addition, Kant regards them as inconsistent
with our “autonomy” since he assumes that





it suffices for heteronomy that first principles are founded on
relations among objects the nature of which is not affected or
determined by our conception of ourselves as reasonable and rational
persons…and by our conception of the public role of moral
principles in a possible realm of ends. (Rawls 2000: 236)





Thus, Rawls concludes that





Kant’s idea of autonomy requires that there exists no moral
order prior to and independent of those conceptions that determine the
form of the procedure that specifies the content of the duties of
justice and of virtue. (Rawls 2000: 236–37)





Rejecting the heteronomous grounding for our judgments assumed by
intuitionists, moral constructivists instead endorse what, as noted
earlier, Rawls calls the doctrine of “constitutive
autonomy”. For them





constructivism is deeper and goes to the very existence and
constitution of the order of values





since





the so-called independent order of values does not constitute itself
but is constituted by the activity, actual or ideal, of practical
(human) reason itself. (Rawls 1993: 99)





The notions of truth and independence that Rawls employs to
characterize rational intuitionism and, by contrast, moral
constructivism are suggestive and influential within recent
meta-ethics (Lenman & Shemmer, 2012) but, as noted initially, they
are also elusive. It is unfortunate, for example, that although Rawls
often refers to the idea of an “independent order of
values” he fails to explain the idea in much detail. As a
result, the degree to which intuitionists are supposed by Rawls to
treat reasons as completely mind-independent is not entirely clear.
For example, do intuitionists allow that in order to be capable of
guiding our actions and attitudes they must be dependent to some
degree on psychological facts?



It is also unclear to which degree moral constructivists are assumed
to treat reasons as mind-dependent. Do they claim merely that reasons
are mind-dependent insofar as they are determined by prior norms that
govern judgements and mental processes? Or do they go even further and
claim that our attitude to those governing norms is what ultimately
makes them valid or invalid? If so, are those norms and attitudes
variable (Street 2010), or invariable (Korsgaard 1996) across
individuals? And how can attaching such a fundamental role to our
attitudes be reconciled with Rawls’s insistence, noted earlier,
that objectivity rules out supposing that “our thinking
something is just or reasonable, or a group’s thinking it so,
makes it so” (Rawls 1993: 111)?



It is less difficult to understand the “method of
avoidance” Rawls employs in his attempt to show that political
constructivism attempts to minimize disagreement with either rational
intuitionism or Kant’s moral constructivism.



On the issue of whether the moral judgments political constructivism
supports are advanced as 
true
, Rawls accepts that it is
“definitive of judgment (moral or otherwise) that it aims at
being reasonable, or true, as the case may be” (Rawls 1996:
111). Employing the distinction between true and reasonable judgments,
Rawls grants that a political constructivist regards the social
scientific judgments she relies upon as true. (In that respect, even a
political conception is at least partially comprehensive insofar as it
relies upon empirical judgments applicable beyond political morality.)
When it comes to judgments about political morality, however, the
situation is more complex.



Here the political constructivist is not 
indifferent
 to
whether the political judgments she affirms are true or false and is
committed at least to denying that they are false (Rawls 1999a). But
constructivism remains uncommitted to truth as the standard of
correctness appropriate to political judgments, and so declines to
insist that those judgments are true. It is also worth noting that as
well as avoiding commitment to a substantive conception of truth, like
those embraced by correspondence or coherence theories, constructivism
avoids commitment to even the 
minimalist conception of truth
,
according to which its nature can be captured 
entirely
 via
disquotation (Horwich 1998; J. Cohen 2009). Instead, the
constructivist claims only that the political judgments she affirms
are better, or at least as well, supported by reasons than the
alternatives, and takes no position regarding the possibility of
defending a more elaborate view of what it is for her political
judgments to be correct. Thus, as Rawls often states, he regards
justice as fairness as the 
most
 reasonable available
political conception.



Although Rawls often invokes the distinction between the standards of
truth and of reasonableness, he does little to explain what makes the
two aims of judgment distinct. At one point he does claim that
“there can be but one true comprehensive doctrine,
though…many reasonable ones” (Rawls 1993: 129). This
statement, however, does not employ the idea of being 
fully

reasonable that Rawls elsewhere uses to characterize correctness in
judgment. Instead, it mentions a satiable form of reasonableness that
depends on a view being sufficiently well-supported by the appropriate
kinds of reasons that it can contribute to a political
decision’s 
legitimacy
 (i.e., its permissible
enforceability and its capacity to provide reasons for obedience) even
if the decision itself is unjustified insofar as there are conclusive
reasons favoring a conflicting decision. Presumably, however, if
reasonableness is the standard of success, then there could also be
several successful conflicting conceptions each of which is no better
supported by reasons than any alternative conception (Raz 1999). In
contrast, if truth is the standard of success, then no similar form of
pluralism is conceivable, at least assuming the standard of truth does
not admit the possibility of a set of conflicting judgments all being
successful. There is, then, some difference between treating political
judgments as truth-apt and reason-apt. It is striking, however, that
Rawls does so little to explain why it is so much more philosophically
contentious to claim that moral judgements can be truth-apt than that
they can be more or less reasonable, or to claim that a particular
political morality, such as justice as fairness, is true than that it
is 
either
 true 
or
 the most reasonable.



In addition, Rawls claims that





a variant of rational intuitionism and political
constructivism…could agree on the very same principles of
practical reason and conceptions of the person and society.





Those views would differ only insofar as the intuitionist view also
affirms the claim that





a reasonable judgment is true, or probably true (depending on the
strength of the reasons), of an independent order of values. (Rawls
1993: 113)





Rawls insists that this additional claim is neither affirmed nor
denied by political constructivism. For this reason, and because of
its similar structure, political constructivism is also consistent
with, but not committed to, moral constructivism.



Having sketched the third characteristic feature of political
constructivism, namely its non-comprehensive content, it is worth
finally noting some limits to the doctrine’s meta-ethical
modesty.



To understand one of those limits, consider Rawls’s response in

Political Liberalism
 to those who affirm the causal
requirement that





a judgment (or belief) is objective just in case the content of our
judgment is (in part) the outcome of an appropriate kind of causal
process affecting our sense experience, say, on which the judgment is
based. (Rawls 1993: 116; cp. Harman 1977: chs. 1 and 2)





The causal requirement confronts constructivists with a dilemma. To
maintain their commitment to the objectivity of their substantive
judgements they must claim that the causal requirement is unsound or
that there exist causal relations between moral reasons and our moral
experience. Since affirming each claim, or affirming the disjunction,
involves endorsing controversial meta-ethical theses Rawls’s
method of avoidance can be pursued only so far.



It is noteworthy that Rawls appears to concede as much when he states
that





Political constructivism accepts Kant’s view this far: it holds
that there are different conceptions of objectivity appropriate for
theoretical and practical reason. (Rawls 1993: 117)





Elaborating his view, Rawls grants for the sake of argument that a





causal requirement is part of an appropriate conception of objectivity
for judgments of theoretical reason, or at least in much of natural
science, and likewise for perceptual judgments,





and proceeds to insist that the requirement





is not essential for all conceptions of objectivity, and not for a
conception suitable for moral and political reasoning. (Rawls 1993:
117)





He goes on to defend the latter claim by appealing to





the fact that we do not require of a moral and political judgment that
the reasons for it show it to be related to an appropriate causal
process, or require an explanation of it within cognitive
psychology…it is enough that the reasons offered are
sufficiently strong. (Rawls 1993: 117)





As Rawls’s remarks indicate, then, political constructivism
involves at least some meta-ethical commitments insofar as it embraces
one component of Kant’s moral constructivism, namely its denial
that objectively sound moral judgments necessarily satisfy a causal
requirement.



Note too that Rawls sometimes appears to characterize rational
intuitionism as a doctrine that affirms the causal requirement and
assumes it can be satisfied because some of our moral judgments are
explicable as the effects of an independent evaluative order.
Attributing the view to Sidgwick, Moore and Ross, Rawls writes that
a





basic psychological assumption of rational intuitionism is that people
can recognize first principles and that the recognition of those
principles as true of a prior order of moral values gives rise to a
desire to act from them for their own sake. 
Moral motivation is
defined by reference to desires that have a special kind of causal
origin
, namely, the reasoned grasp of first principles. (Rawls
2000: 237–38, italics added)





On this characterization, it follows that political constructivism is
not merely uncommitted to the intuitionist doctrine; instead, 
the
two positions are inconsistent because of their opposing treatment of
the causal requirement
. If so, once again, political
constructivism occupies a more partisan position than some of
Rawls’s statements suggest.



It would be mistaken, however, to infer that constructivism’s
opposition to rational intuitionism provides much support to critics
of moral realism, who are thereby able to claim Rawls qua political
constructivist as a philosophical ally. The inference is invalid
because rational intuitionism is just one version of moral realism.
Like other versions of moral realism, rational intuitionism is a

cognitivist objectivist success theory
 (Sayre-McCord 1988).
Thus, it claims that some moral statements express truth-apt judgments
that succeed in being true but are not made true merely by some
subjects’ attitudes. But rational intuitionists go further and
affirm a specific ontological thesis about what does make moral
judgments true, namely facts about an evaluative order that is in some
sense independent of rational beings and capable of entering causal
relations with their psychology.



Other forms of moral realism, however, eschew the ontological
commitments of rational intuitionism, as construed by Rawls. The most
prominent recent example is supplied by Derek Parfit, who defends a
version of what he terms 
Non-Metaphysical Non-Naturalist Normative
Cognitivism
, according to which





There are some claims that are irreducibly normative in the
reason-involving sense, and are in the strongest sense true. But these
truths have no ontological implications. For such claims to be true,
these reason-involving properties need not exist either as natural
properties in the spatio-temporal world, or in some
non-spatio-temporal part of reality. (Parfit 2011: vol. 2, 486)





Taking a similar position over many years, Ronald Dworkin also
defended a form of realism that affirms the existence of moral facts
capable of justifying our attitudes but incapable of explaining them
(Dworkin 1996 and 2011). Arguably, political constructivism
anticipates these views in some respects.


5. The Appeal of Political Constructivism



Having outlined various features of political constructivism, this
section examines its distinctive appeal, and asks why adopting the
doctrine might help secure reflective equilibrium in our considered
judgments about political morality. To do so we examine the
relationship between constructivism’s non-manufactured substance
and its form. More specifically, I shall argue that if we affirm the
associational ideal of well-ordered cooperation, and draw on it to
interpret our other ideals, then the use of a constructivist procedure
to explain why various facts provide reasons for political action
makes sense.



To understand the proposal, recall that if a particular society is
well-ordered then its governing principles fulfill a 
concrete
function
. Describing how that function is understood in theories
like his own, Rawls writes the





social role of a conception of justice is to enable all members of
society to make mutually acceptable to one another their shared
institutions and basic arrangements, by citing what are publicly
recognized as sufficient reasons, as identified by that conception.
(Rawls 1999a: 305)





Rawls’s defense of justice as fairness in 
A Theory of
Justice
 often attempts to show that its principles can perform
the relevant function or, more accurately, can do so better than, or
as well as, rival principles.



As noted in Section 2, a concern that reasons for political action are
publicly recognized explains why the parties in the original position
choose principles via a two-stage procedure that latterly considers
the degree to which individuals who grow up under candidate principles
will acquire, and normally be moved by, a sense of justice with a
content corresponding to those principles. The same concern for public
justification also explains why Rawls insists the parties to the
original position choose amongst principles on the (unrealistic)
assumption that common knowledge of their application exists, so
rendering ineligible 
esoteric
 political principles, like
“government house utilitarianism” (B. Williams 1985;
108–110). In addition, the concern explains why one of the main
ambitions of
A Theory of Justice
 is to provide
“constructive criteria” for political decisions that
economize on intuitive appeals to judgment, thereby providing a
“workable and systematic” alternative to the 
pluralist
intuitionism
, an approach which affirms a variety of principles
but offers no explicit method to order their demands if they conflict
(Rawls 1999a: 35 and xvii).



As well as drawing on the assumption that public justification
matters, Rawls also suggests various explanations of why it is
desirable that individuals who conceive of themselves as free and
equal deliberate about their fundamental political institutions and
decisions by appeal to a widely endorsed family of procedural and
substantive values. One explanation treats citizens’ joint
pursuit of shared final ends as a valuable form of 
civic
friendship
, and the best attainable in societies that treat their
members as free and equal, and so recognize basic civil liberties and
face permanent disagreement over comprehensive doctrines (Ebels-Duggan
2010; Leland 2019; Lister 2013; Rawls 1996: li and 202–4).
Another explanation treats a citizen’s affirmation of the
institutions and decisions that constrain her as a valuable form of

self-governance
, and is suggested by Rawls’s remark
that his conception of justification through mutually recognized
principles is present in Rousseau’s 
Social Contract

(Rawls 1999a: 426; see too Mandle 1997; and J. Cohen 2010:
14–16, 84–96; and especially p. 86 where Cohen writes that
a “vision of self-governance achieved through political
community is Rousseau’s distinctive contribution to political
theory”).



Let us assume that Rawls’s ideal of social unity is plausible:
it is desirable that individuals who are all sufficiently politically
reasonable and conceive of each other as free and equal can justify to
one another their most important political decisions by appealing to
public principles or a family of political values that are mutually
recognized. The case for constructivism derives in part from our
initial substantive assumption, but the use of a procedural test to
validate action-guiding principles also depends on a second
assumption. In addition, constructivism relies on a more

holistic
 assumption (cp. Dworkin 2011), namely that its
conception of social unity is not merely one discrete political value
amongst others but instead an ideal in light of which other
action-guiding political principles should be understood and assessed.
In justice as fairness this assumption is illustrated by the so-called
two-stage argument mentioned above in Sec. 2, according to which the
case for Rawls’s principles of justice is provisional until
their stability relative to other principles is established.



For those who accept both the substantive and holistic assumption,
then it becomes attractive to assess the relative plausibility of
principles of justice by examining their likely concrete realization
and the degree to which they can play the social role of facilitating
well-ordered cooperation. One very natural way to engage in such
assessment is to describe a procedural test in which imaginary agents
akin to legislators select standards to govern fundamental political
decisions partly by drawing on empirical information about the likely
operation of those standards. Thus, given our two assumptions about
the importance of social unity and its interdependence with other
ideals, the constructivist proposal that political principles are
comparable to artefacts and the accompanying idea that political
reasons are in a one (meta-ethically uncommitted) sense manufactured
become more appealing.


6. The Practical Conception of Justification



Opponents of constructivism are free to recognize the values realized
when citizens enjoy civic friendship and political autonomy by acting
on shared political principles that perform a unity-generating social
role. Nevertheless, they might still regard those goods merely as a
desirable byproduct of agents acting on principles made sound by
completely distinct considerations. On this view,
“practical” constructivist justifications for desiring to
act on certain political principles resemble “pragmatic”
justifications for believing, as Pascal’s Wager recommends, in a
divine being: both fail because the facts to which they appeal, whilst
valuable, fall outside the types of considerations that can
rationalize the attitudes they aim to support. More specifically, the
epistemic reasons for our beliefs are given by the 
evidence

for those beliefs rather than any 
accompanying advantages
,
and the practical reasons for our desires are given by the value of
their 
objects
 regardless of whether affirming principles
favoring those desires would place us in valuable 
states
,
like being able to justify our decisions to one another in ways
mutually recognized to be adequate (Parfit 2011a: 50–51,
420–432).



For illustration of this type of critical reaction to constructivism,
consider a similar attitude to various principles of structural
rationality that are often claimed to govern the combination of
preferences, such as 
transitivity
 (Hansson &
Grüne-Yanoff 2006 [2012: §1.3; Temkin 2012: chs. 6–7)
and 
dominance
 (Weirich 2008 [2020]: 2.1). Suppose initially
that agents with preferences that conform to sound rational
requirements consequently often do better than they would if they
violated them; for example, those agents are less liable to
“money pumps” (Gustafsson 2013) if they have transitive
preferences. One standard view of rational action, however, insists
that even when these effects are valuable, they still play no role in
making the relevant requirements sound; instead, the effects, at most,
bear on whether agents should cause themselves to conform to the
requirements.



The standard view makes the same claim about less familiar cases where
conforming to rational requirements is disadvantageous and treats this
as further evidence for its own plausibility. For example, it grants
that agents facing Newcomb’s Problem (Weirich 2008 [2020]) fare
less well if they satisfy rather than violate a 
dominance
principle
, and so intend to take two boxes rather than just one
(Nozick 1969). Similarly, the standard view grants that agents facing
the Toxin Puzzle fare less well if they ground their intentions on the
value of options rather than the consequences of possessing certain
intentions, and so currently lack any intention to consume some poison
in the future even if possessing the intention today would immediately
secure some greater reward (Kavka 1983). The standard view insists,
however, that these discrepancies between what is

advantageous
 and 
rational
 do not count against the
relevant requirements. Instead, they show merely that less rational
agents sometimes fare better than more rational agents and that agents
may sometimes have reasons to regret being fully rational.



Constructivism’s critics might adopt a similar skeptical
attitude to the positive social role of political principles. Thus,
they could grant that social unity, civic friendship and political
autonomy are all desirable consequences that arise when some relevant
agents affirm and conform to certain shared principles. The critics
might also accept that 
if
 those principles really did
resemble artifacts in the way constructivism assumes then such
desirable functional properties would play some role in determining
their validity. Nevertheless, the critics might still counter-argue
that in the case of at least some fundamental political principles
those desirable properties possess no validity-making role, and so
conclude that constructivist accounts of them are doomed to failure.
If this counter-argument succeeds, then just as Pascal’s wager
leads us astray in explaining the reasons for and against belief in a
divine being, so constructivism’s explicitly practical
conception of what justifies our political actions is misguided: both
are practical in a way that makes them unfit to provide an adequate
account of our reasons in the respective domains.



Note that these preliminary remarks have not yet stated any actual
grounds to question the practical conception of political
justification favored by constructivism. The point of the comparison
between constructivism and approaches to justification that involve
“pragmatic encroachment” (Kim 2017; Roeber 2018) in other
domains was only to raise the possibility that constructivism faces a
type of objection familiar elsewhere, and to suggest it merits
attention since in the case of principles of epistemic or structural
rationality it is common to deny the effects of affirming a principle
have any bearing on its validity. If they are right to do so, then why
not think the social role of political principles, or their
affirmation’s functional properties more generally, are
similarly irrelevant?



To examine some reasons to take this question seriously, we now
outline the response to constructivism by its most systematic recent
opponent, G. A. Cohen, as stated in his book 
Rescuing Justice and
Equality
 (2008). Like opponents of pragmatic accounts of our
reasons for belief and intention, Cohen insists that in some domains
certain types of consideration can play no validity-making role:





we do not decide what to believe, whether about fact or about value
and principle, in the light of what we expect the effects of believing
it to be. (2008: 207)





More specifically, appealing to what he regards as a conceptual truth,
and referring to rules grounded on empirical facts and a plurality of
distinct evaluative factors, Cohen insists that constructivist
theories of justice are doomed to fail:





we know from the sort of concept that justice is, that a correct
conception of it excludes the view that its content is the set of
optimal rules of regulation. (2008: 292)





To understand Cohen’s critique and its importance, we begin by
describing its emergence and then some of his more specific
arguments.


7. Against Political Constructivism



G. A. Cohen’s anti-constructivism emerged from his earlier
critique of Rawls’s treatment of inequality-generating economic
incentives (Cohen 1992). Central to the critique is a distinction
between two interpretations of the subject matter of Rawls’s
well-known difference principle, which requires that economic
inequalities should be arranged to maximize the expectations of the
least advantaged. (For non-maximinimizing readings of the difference
principle, see Martin 1985: ch. 6; Pogge 1989: 197; and Rawls 2001:
63–64.) On the 
lax interpretation
 of the principle
favored by Rawls, the difference principle applies only to the
institutional background conditions against which workers make
productive decisions, and so allows workers’ diverse personal
aims to influence their wage negotiations and occupational choices.
Given that such decisions are unlikely to deliver efficient outcomes
if jobs are equally rewarded, the lax principle permits a political
community to use inequality-generating incentives as instruments to
secure 
Pareto efficiency
. In contrast, Cohen defended a

strict interpretation
 of the difference principle, which
extends a concern for the least advantaged beyond institutional design
to also encompass everyday productive decisions. According to that
interpretation, workers must abide by an 
egalitarian ethos

that renders a much smaller range of inequality-generating incentives
necessary for efficiency. Cohen concluded that many of the
inequalities compatible with the lax principle are in fact comparable
to ransom payments insofar as they provide agents with rewards for
making choices that they should have made regardless of those
rewards.



Cohen’s defense of the strict principle provoked several widely
discussed criticisms, including the 
basic structure
objection
, which claims that the difference principle is
restricted in the range of decisions it governs, and does not require
obedience to an egalitarian ethos (G. A. Cohen 1997; Melenovsky 2016).
One version of that objection opposes the strict difference principle
by arguing that satisfying the egalitarian ethos is so difficult to
verify that it fails to provide a suitably 
public
 standard
for individuals to justify their conduct to one another (A. Williams
1998). Recognizing the constructivist pedigree of this appeal to a
distributive principle’s social role, Cohen mounted a full scale
attack on constructivism in the second half of his book 
Rescuing
Justice and Equality
 (G. A. Cohen 2008).



Cohen’s rescue mission focuses on three main features of
constructivist principles of justice (G. A. Cohen 2008: 337):




their grounding in empirical facts,


their sensitivity to a plurality of evaluative grounds, like
publicity and stability as well as equality, and


their insensitivity to the possibility of injustice being genuine
without being to anyone’s detriment.





We now outline each objection, and some possible replies that a
constructivist might employ.


7.1 The Fact-Dependency Objection



The 
fact-dependency objection
 (G. A. Cohen 2003; 2008: Ch. 6)
focusses on the constructivist claim (Rawls 2000: 346–353) that
contingent empirical truths ground even the “first
principles” (Rawls 2000: 341 and 343) of justice and not merely
the “precepts and secondary rules” that enable agents to
better conform to those principles (Rawls 2000: 349). Illustrating the
claim via his own theory, Rawls writes that





in justice as fairness the first principles of justice depend in part
upon those general beliefs about human nature and how society works
which are allowed to the parties in the original position. First
principles are not, in a constructivist view, independent of such
beliefs, nor, as some forms of rational intuitionism hold, true in all
possible worlds. (2000: 351)





As Cohen notes, the constructivist claim is polemically important
since arguments designed to show that justice permits certain
inequalities often turn on contingent empirical assumptions (G. A.
Cohen 2008: 300). As just noted, for example, the constructivist
version of the basic structure objection appeals to contingent facts
about limited information to argue that there are reasons to favor the
lax over the strict difference principle because it is better suited
to perform the public role appropriate for principles of justice.



To refute the claim that first principles of justice are all
fact-sensitive (G. A. Cohen 2008: 336), Cohen advances a “purely
logical argument” based on “what utterances of principle
commit one to” (2008: 247) for the conclusion that believing
that an action-guiding principle is empirically grounded involves a
further commitment to some fact-insensitive principle. As he puts
it,





this is my thesis—
a principle can reflect a fact only
because it is also a response to a principle that is not a response to
a fact
. (2008: 232)





The argument for Cohen’s thesis starts from the intuitively
plausible idea that affirming a normative principle, 
P
, on
some factual ground, 
F
, commits one to a deeper conditional
principle that involves 
F
 as an antecedent but does not
entail that 
F
 obtains. Cohen then extends the idea by arguing
that its repeated application to deeper principles will eventually
deliver fact-insensitive conditional principles that are sound
regardless of any empirical facts obtaining. To elaborate his
argument, he appeals to three plausible premises:




whenever some facts ground a principle there is an
explanation that states how those facts provide some reason to affirm
the principle;


such an explanation involves or implies a deeper
principle that is valid even in the absence of those facts; and


either the deeper principle is itself fact-insensitive
or it is grounded in facts in a way that is ultimately explained by a
principle that is not grounded in any facts (G. A. Cohen 2008:
236–244).





Cohen’s conclusion is that if, as constructivism claims, we
should affirm sound fact-sensitive principles then we must also affirm
some fact-insensitive principles.



Cohen’s argument about the relationship between the affirmation
of fact-sensitive and fact-insensitive principles has provoked various
criticisms (e.g., Estlund 2020: ch. 9; de Maagt 2014; Kurtulmus 2009;
Miller 2012: chs. 1 and 10; Pogge 2008; Quong 2010b; Ronzoni &
Valentini 2008). As Cohen anticipates, some critics might question his
premises, and in particular his premise (iii), and he devotes some
attention to defending them (2008: 236–247). Most critics,
however, argue that constructivists either do not deny there are
fact-insensitive first principles of the sort that Cohen identifies or
can grant their existence whilst maintaining their other key
claims.



To understand one defense of the latter conciliatory response, it is
useful to return to the distinction between first principles and
secondary rules and precepts. One way to interpret the distinction
when applied to the value of justice construes sound first principles
as stating the properties that make objects just or unjust, and
provide sound reasons for action (Rawls 1993: 121). In contrast,
secondary norms are standards that guide deliberation in ways that
enhance conformity with the reasons stated by those primary
principles. Rawls is not entirely explicit about the distinction, but
this is one natural way to interpret the role first principles play in
a constructivist theory. Treating first principles as statements about
justice-making facts that provide reasons for action also fits with
some of Rawls’s remarks about Henry Sidgwick. For example, Rawls
ascribes to Sidgwick, and other English ethicists, the rational
intuitionist thesis that





first principles of morals … are self-evident propositions
about … good grounds for … asserting that something is
(intrinsically) good, or that a certain action is the right thing to
do, or that a certain trait of character has moral worth. (Rawls
1999a: 343)





In addition, Rawls claims that Sidgwick assumes a “method of
ethics” is





specified by certain first principles, principles by which we are to
arrive at a judgment about what we ought to do. (Rawls 1999a: 341)





Suppose, then, that Rawls uses the term “first
principles”, like Sidgwick, to identify reason-giving facts that
render sound various moral judgments, including ones about what
justice requires and prohibits. If so, when pointing out that first
principles of justice always depend on truths about human nature, etc,
Rawls is claiming that whenever statements identifying our reasons of
justice are sound the case for those principles includes some
empirical facts. Now grant too that Cohen is correct to insist that
Rawls is also committed to affirming some conditional principles that
are sound regardless of the truth of any specific empirical
statements. Does it follow that Rawls’s view is therefore
inconsistent since the former claim about first principles being
fact-dependent rules out affirming the latter claim about
fact-insensitive conditional principles?



If we adopt the view of first principles just described, then 
no
inconsistency arises since the two claims mention very different types
of principle.
 The former claim concerns first principles, like
Rawls’s difference principle, that state justice-making
characteristics and reasons for action. The latter claim concerns
meta-principles, like the principle that we should reason from the
perspective of the original position, that relate first principles to
the empirical facts that in part ground them but for various reasons
do not 
themselves
 constitute first principles. They fail, for
example, to state that certain characteristics are justice-making and
reason-giving but merely imply such statements in conjunction with
further propositions asserting that their empirical antecedents
obtain. Moreover, there are no limits on the complexity on the second
type of principle, but it is plausible to assume that sound first
principles identify a limited range of facts. They do so because first
principles state reasons, as already explained, and reason-giving
facts have a dual role: they must be capable not only of favoring
certain responses by just agents but also of explaining those
responses when they occur because demanded by justice (Raz 2011; B.
Williams 1995: 38–39). Even if actual agents fail to respond
appropriately to sound normative reasons, those reasons must at least
be capable of serving as explanatory reasons. The fact-insensitive
principles that Cohen argues are implied by Rawls’s
constructivism, however, are not limited in their complexity, and are
not necessarily capable of serving as explanatory reasons.



As a result of these differences between the two types of principle, a
constructivist can consistently claim that first principles are
fact-dependent whilst conceding the existence of fact-insensitive
principles. If so, Cohen’s first logical argument against
constructivism is unsuccessful because misdirected. Cohen overlooks
this possibility because he assumes that first principles of justice
are ultimate principles that are related to but do not necessarily
state reasons for action. Rawls understands first principles
differently, and consequently the fact-dependency objection fails to
hit its intended target, or so constructivists can argue.


7.2 The Alien Factors Objection



Cohen provides a second and related conceptual objection to
constructivism, which claims it cannot provide a sound theory of

justice
 (G. A. Cohen 2008: 274–302). According to the
objection, constructivist theories of justice are irredeemably flawed
because “non-justice considerations”, such as empirical
facts, and concerns like stability and publicity, “affect the
outcome of typically favored constructivist procedures.”
Referring to such considerations, Cohen sums up his criticism as
follows:





My complaint is not at all that constructivism fails to take them into
account, but precisely that it 
does
 take them into account,
inappropriately, when purporting to identify what justice it. For the
influence of alien factors on the output of the constructivist
procedure means that what it produces is not fundamental justice, and
is sometimes, moreover…not justice at all. Given its aspiration
to produce fundamental principles of justice, constructivism sets its
legislators the wrong task…. (G. A. Cohen 2008:
283–284)





To assess the Alien Factors Objection, we need to understand a
distinction Cohen draws, along two dimensions, between “rules of
regulation” and “fundamental principles of justice”
(G. A. Cohen 2008: 253–254, 263–272, 274–279).
First, a 
rule of regulation
 is a fact-dependent,
instrumentally justified norm that should be chosen on the basis of
its adoption’s likely effects; consequently, following Nozick,
Cohen describes such a norm as “a device for having certain
effects” (Nozick 1993: 38, cited in G. A. Cohen 2008: 265). In
contrast, a 
fundamental principle
 is an unchosen
fact-independent norm that is not justified by its effects. Second, a
rule of regulation can be justified by various types of different
distributive and non-distributive effect that need to be evaluated by
appealing to more ultimate fact-independent principles. In contrast, a
fundamental principle of justice serves 
only
 the value of
justice.



Drawing on these ideas, the Objection starts from the plausible
observation that constructivist distributive principles are
fact-dependent standards that are grounded, in part, on the likely
effects of their acceptance (G. A. Cohen 2008: 282). These include not
only the effects on the absolute and relative size of
individual’s shares of benefits and but also the ways
individuals’ attitudes and relations with one another are
shaped. As we have seen, according to political constructivism the
latter effects matter because, amongst other things, the relative
plausibility of certain political principles depends on their capacity
to play a specific social role. On this basis, the Objection then
concludes that constructivist procedures justify only fact-dependent
principles that are grounded on a plurality of distinct
considerations, and so necessarily are incapable of justifying
fundamental principles of justice. As well as this main conclusion,
Cohen additionally concludes that constructivist principles should
instead be described as rules of regulation (G. A. Cohen 2008:
283).



Turning to the main conclusion of the Objection, one obvious
constructivist response rejects its underlying assumption, quoted
earlier, that constructivists have the “aspiration to produce
fundamental principles of justice” (G. A. Cohen 2008: 282)

in the sense Cohen has mind
. According to the response, which
builds on some remarks by Scanlon (Scanlon 2006: 85), Rawls and Cohen
associate the term “justice” with two different concepts.
Those concepts overlap insofar as they both accept what Cohen terms
“the ancient dictum that justice is giving each person her
due” (Cohen 2008: 7 and see also 252–253) but nevertheless
also diverge in various ways. As a result, constructivists can accept
their doctrine is ill-suited to identify the demands of justice in
Cohen’s sense but deny that this amounts to a criticism of their
view since 
it was never their ambition to do so
.



To question the underlying assumption, consider how Rawls elucidates
the concept of justice employed in 
A Theory of Justice
 (Rawls
1971 [1999a]). In the opening sections of his book, Rawls make two
definitional claims regarding the 
action-guiding implications

and the 
special stringency
 of principles of 
justice

in the sense he focusses on.



First, principles of justice are defined by Rawls as

action-guiding standards applicable to a specific type of decision
about interpersonal relations
 (Rawls 1999a: 9; Anderson 2010). In
the sense that concerns him, justice is ultimately a property of how
agents govern their interaction with one another and is only
derivatively a property of how benefits and burdens are distributed.
Rawls’s familiar remark that the





natural distribution [of talents] is neither just nor unjust …
What is just and unjust is the way that institutions deal with these
facts (Rawls 1999a: 87)





confirms this interpretation of justice as a property of social
relations.



Second, Rawls makes an additional definitional claim via his
well-known remark “Justice is the first virtue of social
institutions, as truth is of systems of thought” (Rawls 1999a:
3). The comparison with the conceptual relationship between belief and
truth suggests that principles of justice necessarily express
especially stringent standards that defeat at least some range of
weighty countervailing considerations.



Rawls’s view about what might ground principles of justice, so
defined, provides further relevant information about his specific
concept of justice. According to Rawls, what makes a conception of
justice sound depends not only on how it solves distributive problems
but also on its capacity to solve other “fundamental social
problems, in particular those of coordination, efficiency, and

stability
” (Rawls 1999a: 5, italics added). As he
explains,





We cannot, in general, assess a conception of justice by its
distributive role alone, however useful this role may be in
identifying the concept of justice. 
We must take into account its
wider connections
 … other things equal, 
one conception
of justice is preferable to another when its broader consequences are
more desirable
. (Rawls 1999a: 6, italics added)





Rawls’s remark clearly indicates that his concept allows
judgements about justice to be grounded in a plurality of
considerations, including one which constructivism explicitly
invokes.



A constructivist can appeal to the claims just mentioned to
counter-argue that because Rawls and Cohen associate the term
“justice” with distinct concepts it is less
straightforward than Cohen supposes to show that the Alien Factors
Objection involves a genuine disagreement with constructivism.



To understand the counterargument, it is important to note that for
Cohen, unlike Rawls, “principles of justice” are not
necessarily decisive or purely action-guiding standards (G. A. Cohen
2008: 302–307). Instead, distributive justice in Cohen’s
sense is ultimately a valuable feature of 
states of affairs

rather than 
social relations
: whether we live in a just world
depends not merely on agents 
giving
 each person their due but
on everyone 
getting
 their due, and that may lie beyond what
any agent is required to achieve or even can achieve (Cohen 2008: cp.
7 and 253, respectively, for the active and passive statements of the
Justinian platitude, and 126). As a result, in Cohen’s sense the
presence of 
unjust
 inequality does not depend on any agents
having failed to conduct themselves according to the appropriate
principles (Cohen 2008: 153–154). Finally, as we have seen,
principles of justice in Cohen’s sense can be justified only on
a more limited range of grounds than Rawls assumes.



Given this variation in the concepts Rawls and Cohen employ, a
constructivist can argue that even if Cohen is correct to conclude
constructivism cannot provide a sound theory of “justice”
in his own sense, this limitation does not necessarily undermine the
doctrine since its subject matter is justice in a different sense. If
the argument succeeds, then the Alien Factors Objection involves a

verbal dispute
 that is likely to dissolve when the
parties’ views are re-expressed more clearly, or in a way that
eliminates the term “justice” (cp. Arneson 2008:
12–14; Chalmers 2011). Indeed, there is evidence to suggest that
Rawls himself viewed his defining remarks about “justice”
not as attempts to capture all the features of the term’s
ordinary use but as providing a relatively satisfactory

substitute
. As Rawls writes, expressing his indebtedness to
Quine,





…there is no necessity to say that sameness of meaning holds
between the word “right” (and its relatives) in its
ordinary use and the more elaborate locutions needed to express this
ideal contractarian concept of right. For our purposes here I accept
the view that a sound analysis is best understood as providing a
satisfactory substitute, one that meets certain desiderata while
avoiding certain obscurities and confusions. In other words,
explication is elimination: we start with a concept the expression for
which is somehow troublesome; but it serves certain ends that cannot
be given up. An explication achieves these ends in other ways that are
relatively free of difficulty. (Rawls 1999a: 95)





Even if the Objection does not refute constructivism, a critic might
still insist it shows the doctrine is
incomplete
 insofar as
there are some sound judgements about justice in Cohen’s sense,
and constructivism cannot explain what makes them plausible.



In response to this charge, a conciliatory constructivist might argue
such incompleteness need not contradict constructivism since the
doctrine is 
ecumenical
: it explicitly allows that recourse to
a non-constructivist theory may be necessary in order to assess some
types of moral judgment (James 2018; A. Williams 2008: 492). As Rawls
explains in his Dewey Lectures,





…the exclusion of…facts as reasons of social justice
does not alone entail that they are not reasons in other kinds of
situation where different moral notions apply. Indeed, it is not even
ruled out that the account of some notions should be constructivist,
whereas the account of others is not (Rawls 1999a: 348)





Elaborating on Rawls’s ecumenical statement, a constructivist
might reply to Cohen by emphasizing that constructivism does not deny
the possibility that outcomes permitted by Rawls’s principles of
justice, including the lax difference principle, can also be judged
defective from the perspective of a sound comprehensive doctrine.



For example, suppose any sound fully comprehensive doctrine implies
there are non-instrumental reasons to regret the fact that theistic
religions survive, and sometimes even flourish, in societies governed
by liberal political conceptions. It does not follow that political
communities should be guided by those reasons, or that their existence
contradicts political liberalism. Similarly, even if Cohen is correct
to judge that there is some sense in which inequalities permitted by
the lax difference principle are regrettable because unjust in his
sense it need not follow that the judgment should guide any political
community or contradicts political constructivism, given its
distinctive and restricted domain.



Cohen was aware that his dispute with constructivism might strike some
critics as verbal and so anticipated them asking





if Rawls hadn’t called his principles “principles of
justice”, would you have no quarrel with him? (G. A. Cohen 2008:
304)





Cohen’s immediate answer was to insist that constructivists pay
a high price if they eschew any ambition to identify fact-independent
pure principles of justice: they are, allegedly, no longer examining
an “an elusive virtue discussed for a few thousand years by
philosophers” (2008: 304), and they relinquish an ambition upon
which “a great deal of the interest of Rawlsianism”
depends (2008: 304). The first appeal to history, however, has met
with well-supported resistance (Ripstein 2010, sec. II, esp.
691–92), and the second response also seems questionable:
judgments about justice in the stringent, action-guiding sense
specified by Rawls’s remarks about the subject matter of his
theory seem at least as interesting as judgments about justice in
Cohen’s sense.



Cohen also provided a later answer, which raises a more important
normative rather than conceptual challenge for constructivist theories
of justice. The challenge claims that constructivists cannot
coherently eschew the ambition to identify fact-independent pure
principles due to





the wholly unterminological point that rules of regulation require
principles of justice, as such, as part of their justification. (G. A.
Cohen 2008: 306)





Constructivists might reject this version of the challenge as marred
by assuming that principles of justices in Rawls’s sense are
rules of regulation, the additional conclusion of the Alien Factors
Objection. There are grounds to question whether Rawls’s
principles of justice can accurately be described as rules of
regulation. To understand them, recall that rules of regulation are
objects of choice for actual agents, and their selection is justified
at least partly by their likely effects, including their tendency to
produce more or less just distributions of benefits and burdens. In
this respect, they resemble the social norms that certain indirect
versions of distribution-sensitive forms of consequentialism recommend
engineering. If so, there are two reasons to doubt that Rawls’s
principles of justice are rules of regulation.



First, Rawls’s principles are not meant to be chosen by any
actual agents; if constructivism is defensible, actual agents should
instead recognize their validity, which derives from the fact they are
the objects of 
hypothetical
 rather than 
actual

choice. Second, Rawls’s principles of justice are not merely
“devices for having certain effects.” As conceived by
constructivism, justice, as noted, is a property of agents governing
their interaction by appropriate principles, and them doing so
realizes an ideal of well-ordered cooperation. As a result, acting on
principle with others has non-instrumental as well as instrumental
value (Ripstein 2010: sec. II). If the idea of rules of regulation
plays some role in characterizing Rawls’s principles of justice,
then, it seems more plausible to think of those principles not as
equivalent to rules of regulation but rather as standards that
determine which rules to institute.



However, the normative challenge raised by Cohen’s later answer
can be restated in a way that avoids reliance on any such a
questionable equivalence between Rawlsian principles of justice and
rules of regulation. In its most general form, the challenge claims
that constructivists must address questions about fundamental
principles of distributive justice in order to defend their own
favored principles of justice 
because fundamental justice is
relevant to the distributive problem constructivism aims to
solve
.



To press this challenge, its proponents need to argue that there are
some sound fundamental principles that evaluate states of affairs, and
that there are valid reasons to promote valuable outcomes using
political means. To do so they might start with retributive
convictions. For example, even when there is full compliance with the
best designed punitive institutions, the fact that innocent persons
are sometimes punished is still, in some sense, an unjust outcome and
its disvalue is relevant when deciding whether those institutions must
be reformed (Gheaus 2013; Rawls 1999a: 75; A. Williams 2008: 492, n.
40). Similarly, Cohen might argue that, because there are some sound
egalitarian principles of justice in his sense, the level of
inequality generated by the lax difference principle is a defect that
is relevant when deciding whether the institutions it favors really do
satisfy the most stringent distributive standards. If so, a concern
with injustice in the pure, fact-independent sense plays a role in
answering the question constructivists themselves pose that is not
eliminable, as Rawls himself sometimes appears to suggest (Rawls 2001:
68).


7.3 The Harmless Injustice Objection



Various kinds of example illustrate the final criticism of
constructivism. Cohen himself discusses examples involving

inequality-increasing Pareto improvements
, where it is
possible to benefit some individuals in a way that increases
inequality but does not make any other individuals worse off in an
absolute sense. Suppose, for instance, that an agent must choose
between a distribution, DI, where both 
A
 and 
B
 have
5 units of benefit and another distribution, DII, in which 
A

has 7 units and 
B
 has only 6 units (G. A. Cohen 2008: 317).
Cohen assumes the greater level of inequality in DII can sometimes
provide a sound but defeasible reason (of justice) to choose DI even
though the choice would not be advantageous to anyone. According to
Cohen, constructivism is incapable of explaining what makes this claim
plausible since constructivist procedures, like Rawls’s original
position argument, select reason-giving principles based on their
capacity to benefit individuals by advancing certain of their
interests (Cohen 2008: 318). Thus, constructivism is defective because
it fails to account for what might be called 
harmless
injustice
 of the sort allegedly present in cases like the one
mentioned.



Cohen’s egalitarian version of the Harmless Injustice Objection
depends heavily on the assumption that there is some reason to promote
equality unconditional on doing so being advantageous to anyone. The
assumption has been the subject of some debate amongst philosophers
working on the ethics of distribution (Parfit 2000; Raz 1986, ch. 9;
Raz 2009; Temkin 2003; Segall 2016) and the influential Levelling Down
Objection to strict egalitarianism. Rejecting or dispensing with the
assumption, some advance efficiency-friendly alternative principles
that still favor redistributing benefits towards less advantaged
individuals. These include partly comparative 
conditional
egalitarian principles
 (Casal 2007; Temkin 2000; Tungodden 2005)
and non-comparative 
prioritarian principles
 (Adler 2012;
Parfit 2000). Thus, constructivists might respond to Cohen’s
egalitarian version of the Harmless Injustice Objection by accepting
his assumption that constructivist procedures select reason-giving
principles based on their capacity to benefit individuals but
rejecting its key strict egalitarian assumption that there are
sometimes defeasible reasons to level down in order to reduce
inequality.



Egalitarian critics of constructivism might respond by pointing out
that Rawls himself frequently construes his own principle of 
fair
equality of opportunity
 in strict egalitarian terms as requiring
that





those who are at the same level of talent and ability, and the same
willingness to use them, should have 
the same prospects of
success
 regardless of their initial place in the social system.
(Rawls 1999a: 63, italics added)





So construed, the principle implies that there are pro tanto reasons
to oppose expanding class-based inequality in occupational opportunity
in ways that enable individuals from more privileged starting points
to enjoy greater occupational opportunities than their similarly able
and motivated but less wealthy counterparts 
even if such expansion
is mutually advantageous
. The critics might insist that it is
more plausible to recognize such reasons than affirm what appears to
be Rawls’s considered view that class-based inequalities in
occupational opportunity are in principle not unjust when they enhance
the opportunities of those with fewest opportunities (Rawls 1999a:
266).



Rawls’s complex remarks about equality of opportunity suggest we
face a choice. We can either accept that class-based inequalities in
occupational opportunity are not unjust provided they increase the
opportunities of the less advantaged, or we can reject constructivism
because of its inability to oppose harmless injustice. Faced with the
need to choose, some will reject constructivism, or at least favor
some fundamental modification; for example, they might revise the
motivational assumption that the agents of construction aim to advance
the interests of the individuals they represent. If they are right to
do so, then one version of Cohen’s final objection succeeds.



Others will remain reluctant to reject constructivism on strict
egalitarian grounds. Even if their reluctance is defensible, it would
still be mistaken to conclude that the Harmless Injustice Objection
fails. The inference is invalid since the Objection can be restated in
ways that focus on forms of harmless injustice, or wrongdoing, that

non-egalitarians
 also oppose. Earlier critics than Cohen have
devised non-egalitarian objections that are designed to show
constructivism is incapable of explaining certain plausible
non-egalitarian convictions or has other implications that are
implausible for non-egalitarian reasons. These arguments apply across
various scenarios, ranging from criminal law (Pogge 1995, esp. sec. V)
to intergenerational ethics (Parfit 1984). The case for constructivism
depends, to a considerable degree, on its capacity to deal with such
older normative rather than conceptual problems (Kumar 2009).


8. Conclusion



The widespread assumption that recognizing what justice requires is
likely to enhance our relations with one another has immediate
intuitive appeal, and arguably leads to the conclusion that the
plausibility of any particular conception of justice turns partly on
the role it might play in generating social unity when embodied in our
thought and conduct. Within Anglo-American philosophy, John Rawls has
refined these ideas with unsurpassed depth and creativity, and the
result is the doctrine of political constructivism. The immediate
products of philosophical depth and creativity are usually not crystal
clear, and so the previous sections have attempted primarily to
clarify the doctrine’s key conjecture that a sound political
morality resembles an artefact in certain respects, drawing on
Rawls’s favored liberal egalitarian version of constructivism
and work of one of his foremost critics, G. A. Cohen. Rawls writes
about another of his similarly seminal and related ideas,





It is a great puzzle to me why political liberalism was not worked out
much earlier: it seems such a natural way to present the idea of
liberalism, given the fact of reasonable pluralism in political life.
Does it have deep faults that preceding writers may have found in it
that I have not seen and these led them to dismiss it? (Rawls 2005:
374, n. 1)





We need to ask similar questions about political constructivism. Given
the centrality Rawls’s thought plays in contemporary political
philosophy, it is reasonable to expect some progress in answering
them.






Bibliography




Adler, Matthew D., 2012, 
Well-Being and Fair Distribution:
Beyond Cost-Benefit Analysis
, New York/Oxford: Oxford University
Press. doi:10.1093/acprof:oso/9780195384994.001.0001


Anderson, Elizabeth, 2010, “The Fundamental Disagreement
between Luck Egalitarians and Relational Egalitarians”,

Canadian Journal of Philosophy Supplementary Volume
, 36:
1–23. doi:10.1080/00455091.2010.10717652


Arneson, Richard J., 2008, “Justice Is Not Equality”,

Ratio
, 21(4): 371–391.
doi:10.1111/j.1467-9329.2008.00409.x


Bagnoli, Carla (ed.), 2013, 
Constructivism in Ethics
,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
doi:10.1017/CBO9781139094221


–––, 2022, 
Ethical Constructivism
,
(Elements in Ethics), Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
doi:10.1017/9781108588188


Barry, Brian, 1989, 
Theories of Justice: A Treatise on Social
Justice
, Volume 1, Berkeley, CA: University of California
Press.


–––, 1995, 
Justice as Impartiality
,
Oxford: Oxford University Press.


Bridges, Douglas and Erik Palmgren, 2013, “Constructive
Mathematics”, 
The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy

(Winter 2013 Edition), Edward N. Zalta (ed.), URL =
 <
https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/win2013/entries/mathematics-constructive/
>.


Brink, David O., 1987, “Rawlsian Constructivism in Moral
Theory”, 
Canadian Journal of Philosophy
, 17(1):
71–90. doi:10.1080/00455091.1987.10715901


–––, 1989, 
Moral Realism and the Foundations
of Ethics
, (Cambridge Studies in Philosophy), Cambridge ;
New York/Cambridge University Press. doi:10.1017/CBO9780511624612


Casal, Paula, 2007, “Why Sufficiency Is Not Enough”,

Ethics
, 117(2): 296–326. doi:10.1086/510692


Chalmers, David J., 2011, “Verbal Disputes”, 
The
Philosophical Review
, 120(4): 515–566.
doi:10.1215/00318108-1334478


Clayton, Matthew, 1999, “Political Liberalism, Disagreement,
and Sectarianism”, 
Polis: Revista de Stiinte Politice
,
6: 71–92


Clayton, Matthew and Andrew Williams (eds.), 2000, 
The Ideal
of Equality
, New York: St. Martin’s Press.


Cohen, G. A., 1992, “Incentives, Inequality and
Community”, in Grethe B. Peterson (ed.), 
The Tanner Lectures
on Human Values
 (Volume 13), Salt Lake City, UT: University of
Utah Press.


–––, 1997, “Where the Action Is: On the
Site of Distributive Justice”, 
Philosophy & Public
Affairs
, 26(1): 3–30.
doi:10.1111/j.1088-4963.1997.tb00048.x


–––, 2003, “Facts and Principles”,

Philosophy & Public Affairs
, 31(3): 211–245.
doi:10.1111/j.1088-4963.2003.00211.x


–––, 2008, 
Rescuing Justice and
Equality
, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.


Cohen, Joshua, 2009, “Truth and Public Reason”,

Philosophy & Public Affairs
, 37(1): 2–42.
doi:10.1111/j.1088-4963.2008.01144.x


–––, 2010, 
Rousseau: A Free Community of
Equals
, (Founders of Modern Political and Social Thought),
Oxford/New York: Oxford University Press.
doi:10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199581498.001.0001


Daniels, Norman, 2003 [2013], “Reflective
Equilibrium”, 
The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy

(Winter 2013 Edition), Edward N. Zalta (ed.), URL =
 <
https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/win2013/entries/reflective-equilibrium/
>.


de Maagt, Sem, 2014, “In Defence of Fact-Dependency”,

Canadian Journal of Philosophy
, 44(3–4): 443–462.
doi:10.1080/00455091.2014.955268


Dworkin, Ronald, 1973, “The Original Position”,

The University of Chicago Law Review
, 40(3): 500–533.
doi:10.2307/1599246


–––, 1996, “Objectivity and Truth:
You’d Better Believe It”, 
Philosophy & Public
Affairs
, 25(2): 87–139.
doi:10.1111/j.1088-4963.1996.tb00036.x


–––, 2011, 
Justice for Hedgehogs
,
Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press of Harvard University Press.


Ebels-Duggan, Kyla, 2010, “The Beginning of Community:
Politics in the Face of Disagreement”, 
The Philosophical
Quarterly
, 60(238): 50–71.
doi:10.1111/j.1467-9213.2008.591.x


Enoch, David, 2009, “Can There Be a Global, Interesting,
Coherent Constructivism about Practical Reason?”,

Philosophical Explorations
, 12(3): 319–339.
doi:10.1080/13869790903067683


Estlund, David, 2020, 
Utopophobia: On the Limits (If Any) of
Political Philosophy
, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
Press.


FitzPatrick, William J., 2005, “The Practical Turn in
Ethical Theory: Korsgaard’s Constructivism, Realism, and the
Nature of Normativity”, 
Ethics
, 115(4): 651–691.
doi:10.1086/430750


Forst, Rainer, 2011, 
The Right to Justification: Elements of a
Constructivist Theory of Justice
, Jeffrey Flynn (trans.), New
York: Columbia University Press.


Freeman, Samuel, 2007, “The Burdens of Public Justification:
Constructivism, Contractualism, and Publicity”, 
Politics,
Philosophy & Economics
, 6(1): 5–43.
doi:10.1177/1470594X07073003


–––, 2009, “Constructivism, Facts, and
Moral Justification”, in 
Contemporary Debates in Political
Philosophy
, Thomas Christiano and John Christman (eds.), Oxford,
UK: Wiley-Blackwell, 41–60. doi:10.1002/9781444310399.ch3


Gheaus, Anca, 2013, “The Feasibility Constraint on The
Concept of Justice”, 
The Philosophical Quarterly
,
63(252): 445–464. doi:10.1111/1467-9213.12058


Gustafsson, Johan E., 2013, “The Irrelevance of the
Diachronic Money-Pump Argument for Acyclicity”, 
Journal of
Philosophy
, 110(8): 460–464.
doi:10.5840/jphil2013110819


Hansson, Sven Ove and Till Grüne-Yanoff, 2006 [2012],
“Preferences”, 
The Stanford Encyclopedia of
Philosophy
 (Winter 2012 Edition), Edward N. Zalta (ed.), URL =
 <
https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/win2012/entries/preferences/
>.


Harman, Gilbert, 1977, 
The Nature of Morality: An Introduction
to Ethics
, New York: Oxford University Press.


Hinton, Timothy (ed.), 2015, 
The Original Position
,
(Classic Philosophical Arguments), Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press. doi:10.1017/CBO9781107375321


Hooker, Brad, 2000, 
Ideal Code, Real World: A
Rule-Consequentialist Theory of Morality
, Oxford: Clarendon
Press


Horwich, Paul, 1998, 
Truth
, second edition, Oxford:
Oxford University Press.


Hussain, Nadeem and Nishi Shah, 2006, “Misunderstanding
Metaethics: Korsgaards’s Rejection of Realism”, in Russ
Shafer-Landau (ed.), 
Oxford Studies in Metaethics
 (Volume 1),
Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 265–294.


James, Aaron, 2014, “Political Constructivism”, in
Mandle and Reidy 2014: 251–264.
doi:10.1002/9781118328460.ch14


–––, 2018, “Constructivism, Intuitionism,
Ecumenism”, in 
Oxford Handbook of Distributive Justice
,
Serena Olsaretti (ed.), Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp.
346–366.


Johnson, Conrad D, 1991, 
Moral Legislation: A Legal-Political
Model for Indirect Consequentialist Reasoning
, Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press. 


Kavka, Gregory S., 1983, “The Toxin Puzzle”,

Analysis
, 43(1): 33–36. doi:10.1093/analys/43.1.33


Kelly, Thomas and Sarah McGrath, 2010, “Is Reflective
Equilibrium Enough?”, 
Philosophical Perspectives
,
24(1): 325–359. doi:10.1111/j.1520-8583.2010.00195.x


Kim, Brian, 2017, “Pragmatic Encroachment in
Epistemology”, 
Philosophy Compass
, 12(5): e12415.
doi:10.1111/phc3.12415


Korsgaard, Christine M., 1996, 
The Sources of
Normativity
, Cambridge/New York: Cambridge University Press.
doi:10.1017/CBO9780511554476


–––, 2003 [2008], “Realism and
Constructivism in Twentieth-Century Moral Philosophy”:,

Journal of Philosophical Research
, 28(supplement):
99–122. Reprinted in her 
The Constitution of Agency: Essays
on Practical Reason and Moral Psychology
, Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 2008, 302–326. doi:10.5840/jpr_2003_8


Krasnoff, Larry, 2014, “Kantian Constructivism”, in
Mandle and Reidy 2014: 73–87. doi:10.1002/9781118328460.ch4


Kumar, Rahul, 2009, “Wronging Future Generations: A
Contractualist Proposal”, in 
Intergenerational Justice
,
Axel Gosseries and Lukas Meyer (ed.), Oxford: Oxford University Press,
pp. 251–272.


Kurtulmus, A. Faik, 2009, “Rawls and Cohen on Facts and
Principles”, 
Utilitas
 21(4): 489–505.
doi:10.1017/S0953820809990240


Laden, Anthony Simon, 2014, “Constructivism as
Rhetoric”, in Mandle and Reidy 2014: 57–72.
doi:10.1002/9781118328460.ch3


Leland, R. J., 2019, “Civic Friendship, Public
Reason”, 
Philosophy & Public Affairs
, 47(1):
72–103. doi:10.1111/papa.12141


Lenman, James and Yonatan Shemmer (eds.), 2012, 
Constructivism
in Practical Philosophy
, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
doi:10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199609833.001.0001


Lister, Andrew, 2013, 
Public Reason and Political
Community
, London: Bloomsbury.


Mandle, Jon, 1997, “Rousseauian Constructivism”,

Journal of the History of Philosophy
, 35(4): 545–562.
doi:10.1353/hph.1997.0075


Mandle, Jon and David A. Reidy (eds.), 2014, 
A Companion to
Rawls
, Malden, MA: Wiley-Blackwell.
doi:10.1002/9781118328460


Martin, Rex, 1985, 
Rawls and Rights
, Lawrence, KS:
University of Kansas Press


McGrath, Sarah, 2019, 
Moral Knowledge
, Oxford: Oxford
University Press.


McKeever, Sean and Michael Ridge, 2006, 
Principled Ethics:
Generalism as a Regulative Ideal
, Oxford: Oxford University
Press. doi:10.1093/0199290652.001.0001


Melenovsky, C. M., 2016, “Incentives, Conventionalism, and
Constructivism”, 
Ethics
 126(3): 549–574.
doi:abs/10.1086/684715


Miller, David, 2012, 
Justice for Earthlings: Essays in
Political Philosophy
, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
doi:10.1017/CBO9781139236898


Nozick, Robert, 1969, “Newcomb’s Problem and Two
Principles of Choice”, 
Essays in Honor of Carl G.
Hempel
, Nicholas Rescher (ed.), Dordrecht: Reidel, pp.
114–146.


–––, 1993, 
The Nature of Rationality
,
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.


O’Neill, Onora, 1989, 
Constructions of Reason:
Explorations of Kant’s Practical Philosophy
, Cambridge/New
York: Cambridge University Press. doi:10.1017/CBO9781139173773


–––, 2002, “Constructivism in Rawls and
Kant”, in 
The Cambridge Companion to Rawls
, Samuel
Freeman (ed.), Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 347–367.
doi:10.1017/CCOL0521651670.010


Parfit, Derek, 1984, 
Reasons and Persons
, Oxford:
Clarendon Press. doi:10.1093/019824908X.001.0001


–––, 2000, “Equality or Priority?”,
inClayton and Williams 2000: 81–125.


–––, 2011a, 
On What Matters: Volume
One
, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
doi:10.1093/acprof:osobl/9780199572809.002.0011


–––, 2011b, 
On What Matters: Volume
Two
, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
doi:10.1093/acprof:osobl/9780199572816.001.0001


Pogge, Thomas W., 1989, 
Realizing Rawls
, Ithaca, NY:
Cornell University Press.


–––, 1995, “Three Problems with
Contractarian-Consequentialist Ways of Assessing Social
Institutions”, 
Social Philosophy and Policy
, 12(2):
241–266. doi:10.1017/S026505250000474X


–––, 2008 [2009], “Cohen to the
Rescue!”, 
Ratio
, 21(4): 454–475. Reprinted in
Brian Feltham (ed.), 
Justice, Equality and Constructivism
,
Malden, MA: Wiley-Blackwell, 2009, pp. 88–109.
doi:10.1111/j.1467-9329.2008.00413.x


Quong, Jonathan, 2010a, 
Liberalism without Perfection
,
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
doi:10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199594870.001.0001


–––, 2010b, “Justice Beyond
Equality”:, 
Social Theory and Practice
, 36(2):
315–340. doi:10.5840/soctheorpract201036215


–––, 2014, “On the Idea of Public
Reason”, in Mandle and Reidy 2014: 265–280.
doi:10.1002/9781118328460.ch15


Rawls, John, 1971, 
A Theory of Justice
, Cambridge, MA:
Belknap Press of Harvard University Press. Heavily revised edition
1999a.


–––, 1980 [1999], “Kantian Constructivism
in Moral Theory”, 
The Journal of Philosophy
, 77(9):
515–572. Collected in 1999b: chap. 16. doi:10.2307/2025790


–––, 1993, 
Political Liberalism
, New
York: Columbia University Press. Paperback edition 1996. Expanded
edition 2005. 


–––, 1996, 
Political Liberalism
,
paperback edition, New York: Columbia University Press. First edition,
1993. [The 1996 edition includes some material not in the 1993
edition.]


–––, 1999a, 
A Theory of Justice
,
revised edition, Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press of Harvard University
Press.


–––, 1999b, 
Collected Papers
, Samuel
Freeman (ed.), Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.


–––, 2000, 
Lectures on the History of Moral
Philosophy
, Barbara Herman (ed.), Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.


–––, 2001, 
Justice as Fairness: A
Restatement
, Erin Kelly (ed.), Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press of
Harvard University Press.


–––, 2005, 
Political Liberalism
,
expanded edition, New York: Columbia University Press. Expanded
edition of his 1993.


Raz, Joseph, 1986, 
The Morality of Freedom
, Oxford:
Clarendon Press. doi:10.1093/0198248075.001.0001


–––, 1989, “Facing Up: A Reply”,

Southern California Law Review
, 62(3/4):
1153–1235.


–––, 1999, “Incommensurability and
Agency”, in his 
Engaging Reason
, Oxford: Oxford
University Press, pp. 46–66. Reprinted in Ruth Chang (ed.),
1998, 
Incommensurability, Incomparability, and Practical
Reason
, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press


–––, 2009, “On the Value of Distributional
Equality”, in 
Hillel Steiner and the Anatomy of Justice:
Themes and Challenges
, Stephen De Wijze, Matthew H. Kramer, Ian
Carter (ed.), London: Routledge, pp. 22–33


–––, 2011, “Reasons: Explanatory and
Normative”, in his 
From Normativity to Responsibility
,
Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 13–35.


Ripstein, Arthur, 2010, “Critical Notice: 
Rescuing
Justice and Equity
 by G. A. Cohen”, 
Canadian Journal of
Philosophy
, 40(4): 669–699.
doi:10.1080/00455091.2010.10716739


Roeber, Blake, 2018, “The Pragmatic Encroachment Debate: The
Pragmatic Encroachment Debate”, 
Noûs
, 52(1):
171–195. doi:10.1111/nous.12156


Ronzoni, Miriam and Laura Valentini, 2008, “On the
Meta-Ethical Status of Constructivism: Reflections on G.A.
Cohen’s ‘Facts and Principles’”, 
Politics,
Philosophy & Economics
, 7(4): 403–422.
doi:10.1177/1470594X08095751


Sayre-McCord, Geoffrey, 1988, “Introduction: The Many Moral
Realisms”, in 
Essays on Moral Realism
, G. Sayre-McCord
(ed.), Ithaca, NY & London: Cornell University Press, pp.
1–23.


Scanlon, T. M., 1982, “Contractualism and
Utilitarianism”, in 
Utilitarianism and Beyond
, Amartya
Sen and Bernard Williams (eds.), Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 103–128. doi:10.1017/CBO9780511611964.007


–––, 1999, 
What We Owe to Each Other
,
Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press of Harvard University Press.


–––, 2003, “Metaphysics and Morals”,

Proceedings and Addresses of the American Philosophical
Association
, 77(2): 7–22. doi:10.2307/3219738


–––, 2006, “Justice, Responsibility, and
the Demands of Equality”, in 
The Egalitarian
Conscience—Essays in Honour of G. A. Cohen
, Christine
Sypnowich (ed.), Oxford: Oxford University Press, 70–87.


–––, 2012, “The Appeal and Limits of
Constructivism”, in Lenman and Shemmer 2012: 226–242.


–––, 2014, 
Being Realistic About
Reasons
, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
doi:10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199678488.001.0001


Segall, Shlomi, 2016, 
Why Inequality Matters: Luck
Egalitarianism, Its Meaning and Value
, Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press. doi:10.1017/CBO9781316416969


Street, Sharon, 2008, “Constructivism about Reasons”,
in 
Oxford Studies in Metaethics
 (Volume 3), Russ
Shafer-Landau (ed.), Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp.
207–245.


–––, 2010, “What Is Constructivism in
Ethics and Metaethics?”, 
Philosophy Compass
, 5(5):
363–384. doi:10.1111/j.1747-9991.2009.00280.x


–––, 2012, “Coming to Terms with
Contingency: Humean Constructivism about Practical Reason”, in
Lenman and Shemmer 2012: 40–59.


Temkin, Larry S., 2000, “Equality, Priority, and the
Levelling Down Objection”, in Clayton and Williams 2000:
126–161.


–––, 2003, “Egalitarianism
Defended”, 
Ethics
, 113(4): 764–782.
doi:10.1086/373955


–––, 2012, 
Rethinking the Good: Moral Ideals
and the Nature of Practical Reasoning
, New York: Oxford
University Press. doi:10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199759446.001.0001


Tungodden, Bertil and Peter Vallentyne, 2005, “On the
Possibility of Paretian Egalitarianism”, 
The Journal of
Philosophy
, 102(3): 126–154.
doi:10.5840/jphil200510234


Wedgwood, Ralph, 2002, “Practical Reasoning as Figuring Out
What Is Best: Against Constructivism”, 
Topoi
, 21(1/2):
139–152. doi:10.1023/A:1014809205396


Weirich, Paul, 2008 [2020], “Causal Decision Theory”,

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy
 (Winter 2020
Edition), Edward N. Zalta (ed.), URL =
 <
https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/win2020/entries/decision-causal/
>.


Weithman, Paul, 2010, 
Why Political Liberalism: on John
Rawls’s Political Turn
, New York: Oxford University Press.
doi:10.1093/acprof:oso/9780195393033.001.0001


Williams, Andrew, 1998, “Incentives, Inequality, and
Publicity”, 
Philosophy & Public Affairs
, 27(3):
225–247. doi:10.1111/j.1088-4963.1998.tb00069.x


–––, 2008, “Justice, Incentives and
Constructivism”, 
Ratio
, 21(4): 476–493.
doi:10.1111/j.1467-9329.2008.00414.x


Williams, Bernard, 1985, 
Ethics and the Limits of
Philosophy
, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.


–––, 1989, “Internal Reasons and the
Obscurity of Blame”, William J. Prior (ed.), 
Reason and
Moral Judgment
, 
Logos
, 
vol. 10
. Santa Clara
University, and Bernard Williams, 
Making Sense of Humanity and
Other Philosophical Papers: 1982–1993
, Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, pp. 35–45.








Academic Tools










How to cite this entry
.








Preview the PDF version of this entry
 at the
 
Friends of the SEP Society
.








Look up topics and thinkers related to this entry

 at the Internet Philosophy Ontology Project (InPhO).








Enhanced bibliography for this entry

at 
PhilPapers
, with links to its database.












Other Internet Resources




“
John Rawls
”,
 entry by Henry Richardson in the 
Internet Encyclopedia of
Philosophy
.








Related Entries




constructivism: in metaethics
 |
 
contractualism
 |
 
justification, political: public
 |
 
original position
 |
 
Rawls, John
 |
 
reflective equilibrium
 |
 
social contract: contemporary approaches to








Acknowledgments



For helpful comments or discussions, I am grateful to Paula Casal, Tom
Christiano, Matthew Clayton, Jerry Cohen, David Estlund, Nir Eyal,
Brad Hooker, Tom Hurka, Jimmy Lenman, Tom Parr, Thomas Pogge, Miriam
Ronzoni, Connie Rosati, Yonatan Shemmer, Victor Tadros, and Peter
Vallentyne, as well as Laura Valentini, who also supplied excellent
editorial advice. For research funding, I acknowledge the U.K. Arts
and Humanities Research Council (ref. 112990) and an ICREA Research
Professorship with the Catalan Institution for Research and Advanced
Studies. 








 






Copyright © 2024
 by




Andrew Williams

<
andrew
.
williams
@
icrea
.
cat
>
    




 









  Open access to the SEP is made possible by a world-wide funding initiative.

  Please Read How You Can Help Support the Growth and Development of the Encyclopedia




 

