











 
 Entry Navigation 






Entry Contents


Bibliography


Academic Tools


Friends PDF Preview 


Author and Citation Info 
 


Back to Top 


























Ecology
First published Wed Feb 21, 2024







[
Editor’s Note: The following new entry by Alkistis
Elliott-Graves replaces the
 
former entry

 on this topic by the previous author.
] 





Ecology is the scientific discipline that studies interactions between
individual organisms and their environments, including interactions
with both conspecifics and members of other species. Its importance
has been recognized at least since Darwin’s publication
of 
Origin of Species
, which categorized ecological interactions
as “the struggle for existence”. Since then, there has
been an ongoing endeavor to systematize investigations of this
struggle into a scientific discipline. Historically, philosophers paid
little attention to ecology, compared to other scientific disciplines,
yet this has begun to change, as it is becoming increasingly obvious
that examining ecological systems is interesting in itself and can
also provide insights for philosophy of science more generally. This
entry will cover a selection of topics that are internal to ecology,
in the sense that they only exist in an ecological context
 (
§2
)
 along with a selection of topics that are already discussed in
philosophy of science yet are particularly interesting when examined
from an ecological standpoint.










1. What is (the scientific discipline called) Ecology?


2. Philosophical Topics in Ecology




2.1 Units of Ecological Research




2.1.1 Ecosystem


2.1.2 Community


2.1.3 Population


2.1.4 Individual (Organism)


 


2.2 The Niche




2.2.1 Conceptualizing the Niche


2.2.2 Against the Niche


 


2.3 Biological Invasions




2.3.1 Defining biological Invaders


2.3.2 The Causes of Biological Invasions


 


2.4 Conservation




2.4.1 Nature, Wilderness and Restoration


2.4.2 Biodiversity


 


 


3. Philosophy of Science in Ecology




3.1 The Scientific Status of Ecology


3.2 Complexity




3.2.1 Characteristics of Ecological Complexity


3.2.2 The Effects of Complexity


 


3.3 Laws


3.4 Levels


3.5 Methods




3.5.1 Models


3.5.2 Experiments


 


3.6 Functions


3.7 Ecology as an Applied Science




3.7.1 Values


3.7.2 Interdisciplinarity


 


 


Bibliography


Academic Tools


Other Internet Resources


Related Entries












1. What is (the scientific discipline called) Ecology?



The term “Ecology” is attributed to Ernst Haeckel, who
coined it to provide a name for the science of what Darwin called the
“Struggle for Existence” (Cooper 2003). This struggle was
a focal point of early evolutionary thought as it constituted an
important driving force of evolution by natural selection (Cooper
2003; Justus 2021). Organisms struggled in their environments,
competing over scarce resources. The study of the outcomes of these
struggles eventually developed into Evolutionary Biology, while the
study of the struggles themselves developed into the discipline of
Ecology. As the science of the struggle for existence matured into
“Ecology” proper, several new struggles emerged, this time
for its practitioners rather than the organisms they studied. These
struggles have shaped the discipline since its beginnings, influencing
the establishment of concepts, methods and epistemic norms
(Elliott-Graves 2019, 2023; Justus 2021; Kingsland 1985 [1995]; Peters
1991).



The underlying cause of many of these struggles comes from the
complexity of ecological systems. Ecological systems are made up of
numerous diverse species and abiotic factors (e.g., water, nitrogen,
phosphorus etc.), all of which interact dynamically with each other
giving rise to events, phenomena and behaviors that are difficult to
investigate scientifically. Some of the most important of these
difficulties are:




the fact that ecological phenomena transcend levels, scales and
hierarchies (see
 
§2.1

 &
 
§3.4
),


data is difficult to obtain and often of poor quality (despite the
best efforts of ecologists) (see
 
§3.2

 &
 
§3.5
),


generalizations are contingent and have limited scope (see
 
§3.3
),


the discipline of ecology combines both “pure” and
“applied” research traditions, which have different (often
competing) research goals and norms and (see
 
§2.4

 &
 
§3.7
)


epistemic and non-epistemic goals and values coexist in many
research areas, especially those in the applied tradition, where they
are often interwoven with policy-making (see
 
§2.4

 &
 
§3.7
).





From a philosophical point of view, these struggles make the
discipline of Ecology particularly interesting. The phenomena
ecologists investigate along with the challenges they face can teach
us valuable lessons about how science, especially the science of
complex systems, works. In addition, philosophical approaches can be
fruitful for ecological research (see for example Diamond 1986; Levins
1966; Odenbaugh 2007; Sarkar 2014a; Trappes et al. 2022). Even though
philosophy of ecology is a relatively new field of research, there are
a great number of topics that are worth discussing. It is impossible
to cover all these topics and to cover them extensively. So, this
entry will provide a brief overview of a selection of topics. It is
important to note that, as this is an entry on 
philosophy
 of
ecology, the topics selected for discussion are those that have
established philosophical debates, in addition to their importance for
ecological research. Also, the length of each section should not be
taken as an indication of its importance relative to other topics.
Some topics that are already discussed in other entries in this
encyclopedia (e.g.,
 
conservation biology
,
 
biodiversity
,
 
levels of organization in biology
,
 
models in science
) are given briefer overviews.



Finally, categorizing all these diverse topics is itself a difficult
task, as there are numerous possible ways to divide them and multiple
connections between each topic. In order to maximize the readability
and usefulness of the entry for understanding the philosophy of
ecology, the entry has been organized as follows.
 
Section 2
,
 titled Philosophical Topics in Ecology, covers the topics originating
in ecological research that have also generated philosophical
interest. These are the novel topics for philosophy, which only came
about because of the study of ecological systems.
 
Section 3
,
 titled Philosophy of Science in Ecology, covers classical issues in
general philosophy of science, which are particularly interesting when
applied to ecology, either because the classical accounts do not apply
to ecological systems or because the investigation of the topic in the
context of ecological systems, has generated novel insights.


2. Philosophical Topics in Ecology


2.1 Units of Ecological Research



Most discussions of ecology, including ecological textbooks, divide
ecological research in terms of the main “ecological unit”
the research focuses on (Jax 2006). The three main units are

populations
, 
communities
, and 
ecosystems
.
On the one hand, research on all of these units is well established,
as each is associated with a recognized ecological sub-discipline,
with its own research questions, methods and norms. On the other hand,
however, there are residual theoretical issues concerning how to
define each unit, and whether or not all these units are truly
distinct (Odenbaugh 2007; Trombley & Cottenie 2019). The next
three sub-sections address the main conceptual and methodological
issues associated with ecosystems, communities and populations
respectively, and the section concludes with a discussion of
individuals, a topic which is gaining momentum in philosophy of
ecology. It is important to keep in mind that not all ecological
research falls neatly into one of these categories, but straddles more
than one unit (e.g., landscape ecology [Turner & Gardner 2015],
work on metapopulations [Hanski & Simberloff 1997; Millstein 2010]
and community genetics [Antonovics 1992], see also the entry on
 
§3.4
).


2.1.1 Ecosystem


Concept



An ecosystem can be minimally defined as all the organisms in an area
along with the physical environment with which they interact. The
question, and point of contention, is how the parts of an ecosystem
are defined and how they are connected to each other. There are three
main ways to conceptualize ecosystems (Odenbaugh 2007; Raffaelli &
Frid 2010). The first is the Elton-Lindeman view, where ecosystems are
complex systems, i.e., more than the sum of their parts. Here,
populations of organisms and abiotic factors are conceived as parts of
networks with energy flowing between them (as one is consumed by
another). The second is the holistic/system’s level conception,
advocated by H.T. Odum, where organisms are completely dispensed with
and the ecosystem is just the energy flows between trophic levels
(Odum 1968). The third is a skeptical approach to ecosystems, either
in the sense that they are too loosely connected to be anything more
than the sum of their parts (see also
 
§2.1.2
),
 or because various ecosystems are too diverse to have anything in
common, so there is nothing to be gained from studying them as a
special type of entity (see discussion in Odenbaugh 2007). The
ontological status of an ecosystem has some important implications,
such as whether or not an ecosystem can be “healthy” (see
 
§2.4.1
)
 and what constitutes ecosystem “function” (see
 
§3.6
).


Method



Ecosystem ecology emerged as an alternative to community and
population ecology (see
 
§2.1.2

 and
 
§2.1.3
),
 because these approaches only took into account the interactions
between the 
living
 components of the system (Odenbaugh 2007).
Ecosystem ecologists stressed the importance of including

abiotic
 factors into ecological research and models (Odum
1968; Raffaelli & Frid 2010). In order to include all these
additional causal factors, ecosystem models focus on the transfer of
energy between the various trophic levels (e.g., primary producers,
herbivores, carnivores, detritivores) (Raffaelli & Frid 2010).
Ecosystem-level models, such as Ecosystem Network Models tend to be
very rich in detail and constructed for, or at least tailored to a
particular system (see also
 
§3.5.1
).
 The main critiques of these models are that




they are system-specific and therefore do not allow the transfer
of knowledge to other systems, and


as they incorporate lots of detailed data, they are prone to
“overfitting” i.e., including noisy data or errors
(Hitchcock & Sober 2004).




2.1.2 Community


Concept



The debate concerning the ontological status of communities has deeper
roots than the one about ecosystems. It sits at the heart of a broader
debate about the whole sub-discipline of community ecology, namely
whether it is a worthwhile approach to studying ecological systems
(Lawton 1999; Roughgarden 2009; Simberloff 2004). Communities can be
conceived as:




mere 
aggregates
, if their parts are not interdependent
and thus do not merit any special ontological status,


wholes
, i.e., more than just the sum of their parts, if
causal relations exist between their parts, or


individuals
, if their parts are so closely connected that
they display a level of internal structure (Odenbaugh 2007).





Each of these views has had influential ecologists as advocates (Eliot
2011; Odenbaugh 2007; Roughgarden 2009). For example, Henry Gleason
did not believe that communities were anything more than the sum of
their parts. George Evelyn Hutchinson believed that communities
displayed interactions that included feedback loops, which resulted in
self-regulation, and hence should be thought of as wholes. Finally,
Frederic Clements viewed communities as being so deeply interconnected
that they should be understood as 
superorganisms
,
ontologically equivalent to individual organisms. Historians and
philosophers of science have also engaged with the concept of an
ecological community, providing in-depth discussions of the
ontological status and viability of various community concepts along
with their historical and sociological evolution (Colyvan, Linquist,
et al. 2009; Eliot 2011; Lean 2018; Linquist 2015; Sterelny 2006).
While there is no consensus, the prevailing view is that while
communities are not superorganisms/individuals, they possess enough
internal structure, or clear boundaries to count as wholes (Lean 2018;
Sterelny 2006, see also discussion in Odenbaugh 2007. Millstein [2018]
supports the communities as individuals view).


Method



Research in community ecology focuses on the interactions between
populations within a community. The most important of these are

competition
, 
predation
, 
mutualism
 and

parasitism
. Community ecology is also the framework for many
of the landmark concepts and ideas in ecological research, including
the majority of concepts that are thought of as typically ecological,
such as the 
niche
, 
trophic levels
, 
keystone
species
 and 
ecological engineering
 (Ricklefs &
Miller 2000). Of all the approaches in ecology, community ecology is
probably the one with the greatest focus on experimentation (Lubchenco
& Read 1991). In fact, many ideas in community ecology were
established through landmark experiments, such as Paine’s
intertidal experiments that led to the concept of a keystone species,
while others, such as Gause’s competition experiments, became
renowned for demonstrating that theoretical principles could manifest
in real-world communities. Models also play an important role in
community ecology, the most notable of which are the Lotka-Volterra
models of competition and predation (Knuuttila & Loettgers 2017;
Weisberg 2007b). The advantages and disadvantages of these models are
similar to the ones used in population ecology, discussed next (see
also
 
§3.5
).


2.1.3 Population


Concept



Ecologists typically define a population as a group of interbreeding
organisms or organisms of the same species, found in the same space or
area at the same time (Rockwood 2015). The position that populations
are real units in nature is less controversial than the equivalent
claims for communities and ecosystems (Cooper & Hurd 2019;
Millstein 2009; but see Gannett 2003). Still, philosophers disagree on
a number of points regarding the nature of populations. An important
contribution to this literature is a series of papers by Roberta
Millstein (2009, 2013, 2014), where she argues that the ambiguity in
the way the term population is used by ecologists and evolutionary
biologists is problematic, as it leads to confusion and can hamper
progress in biological research. Instead, she proposes the 
causal
interactionist population concept
 (CIPC), for both ecological and
evolutionary populations. Here, a population is defined as:





at least two conspecific organisms that, over the course of a
generation, are actually engaged in survival or reproductive
interactions, or both. (Millstein 2014: 750)





An important dimension of Millstein’s conception is that
populations are viewed as 
individuals
, after Ghiselin and
Hull’s conception of species as individuals
 (
§2.1.2
,
 see also
 
species, §2.2
).
 Critiques of the CIPC include arguments against
populations-as-individuals, on the basis that the ecological
conception of population differs significantly from its evolutionary
counterpart and that the populations-as-individuals account applies
only to the latter (Cooper & Hurd 2019), along with arguments for
a more pluralistic account of populations (Stegenga 2010).


Method



Population ecology is as old as ecology itself. Indeed, on one view,
ecology only became a true scientific discipline, when mathematical
models from demography and physics were applied to ecological
populations (Evans et al. 2013; Kingsland 1985 [1995]; see also
 
§3.1
).
 Research in population ecology focuses on population dynamics,
especially demographic processes (such as density dependent growth,
Allee effects) and the effects of migration (Rockwood 2015). Models in
population ecology tend to be simple and general, in the sense that
they contain few parameters and apply to many different populations.
The main critique of these models is that they are not very realistic,
as they leave out factors that are idiosyncratic to some populations
(Evans et al. 2013; see also
 
§3.5.1
).
 For example, competition models that are developed for animals do not
apply that well to plant populations, as they do not take into account
the importance of abiotic factors for plant competition (Berger et al.
2008).


2.1.4 Individual (Organism)



When compared to the other ecological levels, the level of individual
(organisms) has received less attention. Most models and experiments
focus on groups rather than individuals, and when individuals do make
an appearance (e.g., in individual-based models), they are usually
aggregates or averages of the entire population and largely
homogeneous with each other (Kaiser & Trappes 2021; Trappes 2022).
There are good epistemic reasons for this. Variation between
individuals is often an indication of error in data collection or
interpretation and can add unnecessary complexity to the model or
experiment. Homogenizing across individuals can thus reduce
observation and measurement errors and can allows scientists to
distinguish between genuine causal factors and mere noise
(Elliott-Graves 2019, 2023).



Nonetheless, there is a contingent of ecologists who advocate for
greater focus on individuals, especially on individual differences.
Some sub-disciplines, such as Behavioral Ecology and Physiological
Ecology, focus explicitly on individuals. Moreover, in 1972, Joan
Roughgarden argued that differences between individuals within a
population explain the phenomenon of “niche width” i.e.,
the variety of resources a population exploits, which in turn has
implications for the resilience of the population (Roughgarden 1972).
Individual-Based models, imported from economics (see
 
§3.6
),
 highlighted the importance of focusing on individuals, even though
the individuals themselves are largely homogeneous and differ only on
one or two dimensions (Justus 2014). More recently, there has been a
concerted effort to incorporate individual differences in models and
experiments in numerous pars of ecological research (Moran et al.
2017; Mutwill et al. 2021; Nagel et al. 2021; Schwarz et al. 2021).
This has led to important insights. For example, dominant meerkat
females temporarily evict subordinate females from the group, leading
to a higher level of spontaneous miscarriages and a suppression of
their competitors’ reproduction (Trappes et al. 2022; Andrew
Young, et al., 2006).



Note: The discussion of individuals in the context of philosophy of
ecology is not related to the debate surrounding biological
individuality (see
 
biological individuals
).
 The latter concept centers on individuals in a predominantly
evolutionary context. For a comparison between the two debates see
(Kaiser & Trappes 2021).


2.2 The Niche



Perhaps the most important distinctly ecological concept is that of
the “niche”. As is the case with many other ecological
concepts, the niche is notoriously difficult to define. A number of
influential ecologists have formulated conceptualizations of the
niche, including Grinnell, Elton, Hutchinson and MacArthur.
Categorizing these concepts is far from straightforward, as they
overlap in some ways but differ in others.
 
Section 2.2.1
,
 outlines three historically important conceptualizations of the
niche (the niche as 
habitat
, the 
functional
 niche
and the niche as an 
n-dimensional hyperspace
). 
 
Section 2.2.2
,
 examines the role of the niche in ecological theorizing along with
some critiques of the niche concepts and framework.


2.2.1 Conceptualizing the Niche


Habitat



Historically, the idea of the niche can be dated back to Darwin, yet
the first lengthy treatment of the niche concept is found in the work
of Joseph Grinnell, who used the term to describe the aspects of the
environment, biotic and abiotic, that a species occupied (Gaffney
1975; Pocheville 2015). There are two central characteristics of the
Grinnellian niche. The first is that each niche can only be occupied
by one species, that is, two species in the same ecosystem cannot
occupy the exact same niche. Second, new niches can arise as habitats
change, and existing niches can become 
vacant
, as species
become locally extinct, providing the space and adaptive pressure for
other species to occupy them. This gives the Grinnellian niche
explanatory power, as properties of niches can explain certain
species’ phenotypic adaptations: organisms adapt to fill vacant
niches (see discussion in Justus 2021).


Function



A different conception of the niche was proposed by Charles Elton.
Elton noticed that while there is a lot of variation in terms of the
species that populate different habitats, there are some important
similarities in terms of trophic level: most communities have
herbivores, carnivores and detritivores. His conception of the niche
focuses on the function of the organism within a community, i.e., its
place in the biotic environment and its relationships with other
organisms, such as its prey and predators. Elton thought of the niche
as analogous to an occupation, famously stating:





When an ecologist says “there goes a badger” he should
include in his thoughts some definite idea of the animal’s place
in the community to which it belongs, just as if he had said
“there goes the vicar”. (Elton 1927: 64)





Elton’s functional conception of the niche also accommodates the
idea of vacant niches, which can be occupied by organisms that adapt,
migrate or invade a community.


N-dimensional hyperspace



About 20 years after Elton, G.E. Hutchinson proposed yet another
conception of a niche that bore some similarities but also some
important differences to both previous conceptions. The basic idea is
this: for any particular species, imagine a space, where every
environmental factor that affects it (biotic and abiotic) is
represented on an axis. The number of relevant factors (
n
)
determine how many axes the space will have. The space within these
axes, where a species can persist (i.e., has positive fitness) is its

fundamental niche
. Within this space is a smaller one which
delineates where the species actually exists—this is its

realized niche
 (Chase & Leibold 2003).


2.2.2 Against the Niche



An important feature of the niche concept is that it helps to explain
the dynamics and structure of ecological communities. It does so
through the principle of competitive exclusion (CEP), which states
that complete competitors, i.e., species with identical niches, cannot
coexist (Bausman 2019; Griesemer 1992). So, the closer the competition
is between species the higher the incentive to diversify one’s
niche or migrate. For some, competition theory, inclusive of the CEP,
is the cornerstone of ecology and its relationship with evolutionary
biology, as it is the basis for understanding community dynamics and
the evolutionary structure of communities (Griesemer 1992; Kingsland
1985 [1995]).



The popularity of the niche concept is extensive but not ubiquitous.
Some ecologists believe that the niche/competition framework is
insufficient for explaining community-level ecological phenomena. For
example, the CEP has been criticized as untestable and not
scientifically useful (see discussion in Justus 2019). An important
landmark in this debate is Stephen Hubbell’s 
neutral
theory
 of community structure, where differences between species,
are neutral, i.e., irrelevant to their success within a community
(Hubbell 2001). Instead, community structure is affected by drift
(random birth and death), dispersal, and speciation. In other words,
niches do not influence the relative abundances of each species in a
community, so they have little import in the study of community
structure. The neutral theory itself is quite controversial, as is its
exact relationship with the niche/competition framework (Bausman 2019;
Chase & Leibold 2003; Justus 2021). The neutral theory can be seen
as an alternative to the competition framework, or as a 
null
hypothesis
, i.e., a hypothesis that must be shown to be false
before an alternative (here, a competition hypothesis) is accepted
(Bausman 2019). Some ecologists have attempted to reconcile the two
alternatives into one theory that integrates aspects of both
approaches, (see for example Chesson 2000; Vellend 2010).



A different criticism comes from Justus (2019; 2021), who argues that
the niche concept is superfluous, on the grounds that none of the
existing niche concepts are actually useful in ecological research, as
they do not consistently explain or predict community structure in the
real world. Moreover, attempts to combine existing niche concepts in
order to overcome the deficiencies of individual definitions are
doomed to fail, because such combinations become too abstract and
devoid of causal information to adequately represent real ecological
communities, let alone predict community structure.


2.3 Biological Invasions



The recognition that species outside their native range can cause
problems for indigenous species dates back to Darwin, who realized
that in each habitat species have friends and enemies which affect
their population’s growth, and when a was introduced to a new
habitat without enemies, it could take over at the expense of the
native species (Reichard & White 2003). After Darwin, there was
little interest in the problems associated with invasive species,
until the publication of Charles Elton’s book 
The Ecology of
Invasions by Animals and Plants
 in 1958. Elton thought that
invasive species were exceedingly problematic and his main aim was to
provide a framework for the conservation of native communities (Davis
2006). Since then, there has been a rapid increase in the research on
biological invasions, which has resulted in the establishment of
invasion biology as a sub-discipline of ecology, with research
programs and journals dedicated to research on the concepts, methods,
impacts and management of biological invaders (Enders et al. 2020;
Reichard & White, 2003).


2.3.1 Defining biological Invaders



Defining a biological invader is not an easy task. Terms to describe
species outside their native range include “invasive”,
“alien”, “exotic”, “introduced”,
“non-native”, “adventive”,
“neophyte”, “naturalized”,
“immigrant”, “weed”, “noxious”,
along with compound terms such as “invasive alien”,
“non-native invader” and so on (Colautti & Richardson
2009; Pysek 1995; Ashley Young & Larson 2011). Each of these terms
has its own set of assumptions and implications that preclude a
universally acceptable classification. For example, if we were to
define “invasive” as a species that was widespread outside
its native range, this classification includes many species typically
classified as invasive. However, a significant number of cases would
be much less obvious. First, what counts as a species’ native
range? Migration (including human-assisted migration) of plants and
animals has occurred for millennia, but not all migrations have
resulted in invasion. For many widespread species, we might not even
be sure about their native range (Courchamp, Hulme, & Pyšek
2020). Second, what counts as widespread? Some species become
established and spread yet do not pose threats to native ecosystems.
Should these count as invaders or not? Third, some species become
“integrated” into new ecosystems and removing them can
actually create problems for native species (Singer & Parmesan
2018). Should these species count as invasive?



The debate surrounding the definition of biological invaders has
gained momentum, resulting in heated exchanges between prominent
invasion biologists (and some philosophers) (Frank et al. 2019;
Guiaşu & Tindale 2023; Ricciardi & Ryan 2018; Richardson
& Ricciardi 2013; Sagoff 2018; Young & Larson 2011). The
debate centers on the effect of value-laden terminology on perceptions
of non-native species and their management. On one side of the debate
are those who believe that the terminology used to described
non-native species (such as alien or invasive) is xenophobic and leads
to biases in the research, resource allocation and management of
biological invasions (Davis, Chew, et al. 2011; Guiaşu &
Tindale 2023; Sagoff 2018). They argue that the perceived threat of
invasives is often overblown, for example because few extinctions can
be attributed to the effect of biological invasions (Gurevitch &
Padilla 2004), while in some cases their effect can even be positive,
as they can mitigate other anthropogenic disturbances, such as soil
erosion, while their presence can increase biodiversity or introduce
novel (and sometimes stabilizing) interactions in biological
communities (Davis, Chew, et al. 2011). In addition, efforts to manage
biological invasions are often unnecessary, as they are unlikely to
succeed despite incurring significant economics costs, and in some
cases can even cause additional harm to native communities,
exacerbating existing problems or even creating new ones (Davis, Chew,
et al. 2011; Guiaşu & Tindale 2023; Thiengo et al. 2007).



The opposing view is that, occasional benefits notwithstanding, the
overall effect of invasive species is overwhelmingly negative
(Richardson & Ricciardi 2013). Proponents of this view cite
numerous cases, especially island communities, where invaders have
decimated indigenous species, and disrupted ecosystem functioning
(Simberloff 2011). Even in cases where the effects of invaders are not
yet obvious, either because they are not yet widely spread in a new
area, or because they do not compete with certain native species,
there is always the possibility that a non-native species will pose a
threat to a native ecosystem in the future, a possibility that is
becoming increasingly more likely due to the effects of climate change
(Sax & Brown 2000; Simberloff 2014). The rhetoric on this side of
the debate is also quite strong, as scientists in this camp charge
their opponents with espousing “invasive species
denialism”, i.e., adopting a non-scientific or pseudoscientific
approach to biological invasions, by focusing on the value-leadenness
of terminology, cherry picking examples of positive effects of
invaders and ignoring or downplaying the evidence of negative effects
of invasions (Frank et al. 2019; Ricciardi & Ryan 2018).


2.3.2 The Causes of Biological Invasions



Another important question in invasion biology is: what causes some
invasions to succeed and others to fail? The search for the causes of
biological invasions has its own history and tensions. There are two
main research traditions on the cause of invasions. In the first
tradition, which grew out of population ecology, the causes of
invasion were to be found at the level of the invader. The idea is
that invasions succeed when invaders possess a combination of traits
which allow them to establish and spread in new areas, by outcompeting
or otherwise disturbing native species. For example, (Grotkopp et al.
2002) identified small seed mass, short generation times and a high
relative growth rate as the characteristics of successful invasions in
the genus 
Pinus
. Species which have a fast growth strategy
have increased productivity which results in larger overall biomass.
Together with a greater efficiency in dispersal, this confers a
competitive advantage to species in a new area, at the expense of the
native species. That is, faster growth, in terms of individual and
population level biomass, can decrease the available resources for
other plants in the same habitat.



The second tradition identifies the causes of invasion at the level of
the community or ecosystem, i.e., by focusing on characteristics that
allow communities to resist invasion. The idea is that each community
erects a series of barriers which invaders have to overcome in order
to succeed in invading. A popular example of an ecosystem-level
barrier to invasion was biodiversity, the idea being that a more
diverse community would be more robust to perturbation (Kennedy et al.
2002). While this descendant of the diversity-stability hypothesis has
largely been abandoned (McCann 2000), it has been replaced by more
nuanced accounts. For example, (Davis, Grime, & Thompson 2000)
argue that diverse communities, which occupy more of an
environment’s niches are less likely to have fluctuating
resources as they use them up more consistently, thus decreasing the
availability of resources to invaders.



Neither research tradition has succeeded in producing a generalized
theory of invasion that can be used for prediction and management
(Catford et al. 2009; Hayes & Barry 2007; Reichard & White
2003). Despite attempts to integrate the two research traditions, a
unified theory of invasion biology has yet to be developed. This is an
ongoing thorn in the side of some invasion biologists, as they worry
that invasion biology cannot progress without such a theory (Blackburn
et al. 2011; Enders et al. 2020). However, some ecologists and
philosophers view a unified theory of invasion biology as unlikely, as
biological invasions are exceedingly complex and context dependent
(Jeschke et al. 2012; Valéry et al. 2013). The particular
causal factors and dynamic interactions that give rise to each
invasion are idiosyncratic, possibly even unique, so even if we find a
general theory, it will have so many exceptions that it will not be
very useful for predicting and managing invasions (Elliott-Graves
2016) (see also
 
§3.3
).


2.4 Conservation



Conservation biology focuses on protecting parts of the world that are
deemed ecologically important. It can be considered a sub-discipline
of ecology, or a distinct field of research, with aims that sometimes
diverge from traditional or “fundamental” ecology (Justus
& Wakil 2021; Linquist 2008, see also
 
§3.7
).
 The next two sections examine two important issues in
conservation biology, the ideas of 
nature
 and

wilderness
 and their relationship to 
restoration
 and
the notion of 
biodiversity
. Other important topics in
conservation biology include the extent to which it is
ethically-driven, which is outlined in
 
section 3.7
,
 along with debates concerning the best approaches and methods for
determining and implementing conservation strategies. The latter issue
is covered extensively in
 (
conservation biology
)
 and will not be discussed in this entry.


2.4.1 Nature, Wilderness and Restoration



One set of issues in the philosophy of conservation biology concerns
the “ideal” of conservation, i.e., how we should
conceptualize the goals of conservation. There are ongoing debates
about how we should understand the concepts of “nature”
and “wilderness”, for example, whether humans and human
activity are part of nature, and when a habitat can be considered
“wild” (Higgs 2003; Woods 2017). These disagreements are
not merely semantic, as they can affect actual strategies for
conservation. An important and ongoing discussion concerns the

historical fidelity
 of restoration projects. One view, put
forward by the Society for Ecological Restoration (SER), amongst
others, is that restoration should not just aim to “mend”
damaged ecosystems but that it should aim to restore ecosystem
functions by returning ecosystems to some past state, i.e., so that
this function is performed by the same entities, that did so in the
past (SER in Desjardins 2015; Garson 2014). An alternative view is
that historical fidelity is difficult to identify and measure (which
is the relevant past of an ecosystem? How far into the past should we
go? How can we be sure about the species compositions in past versions
of ecosystems? Etc.), and should therefore be replaced with other,
more fundamental goals (Sarkar 2011, 2014a, 2014b). Those responding
to this critique of historical fidelity concede that there are
conceptual and practical difficulties with historical fidelity, yet
argue that it is still valuable as a goal for conservation (Desjardins
2015; Garson 2014).



A related debate concerns the notion of “ecosystem
health”. We could think of the aim (or at least one aim) of
conservation biology as the promotion and maintenance of healthy
ecosystems. However, there is little agreement about what whether
ecosystems can be the bearers of health (McShane 2004). The three main
views in the debate are:




that ecosystems can literally be healthy and unhealthy (McShane
2004),


that ecosystem health is a metaphorical concept, akin to that of a
“healthy economy” (Callicott 1995)


that ecosystems are not the types of entities that can be healthy
or unhealthy, e.g., because they are not organisms, because they are
merely social constructs, or because the appropriate notion of
ecosystem function does not provide norms of performance that are
necessary for a notion of health (see discussion in Odenbaugh 2010,
McShane 2004 and
 
§3.6
).




2.4.2 Biodiversity



What should conservation biology conserve? The usual answer to this
question is “biodiversity” (Justus 2021; Maclaurin &
Sterelny 2008; Santana 2014; Sarkar 2002; Sarkar & Margules 2002,
see also
 
biodiversity

 and
 
conservation biology
).
 There is general agreement that biodiversity is extremely important,
yet much less agreement on what exactly biodiversity means (Santana
2014; Maclaurin & Sterelny 2008). On a superficial level,
biodiversity simply means the “variability among living
organisms” in various ecosystems (United Nations summit
definition, found in Santana 2014, p. 763. However, this superficial
definition is not particularly helpful, because it is akin to saying
that biodiversity includes “everything in biology” (Sarkar
2002). Such a concept is neither easily operationalizable, nor does it
help us determine what should be conserved (Santana 2014; Sarkar
2002).



There are two general approaches to defining biodiversity. The first
is to define it 
explicitly
, i.e., to identify a set of
characteristics that jointly pick out the concept. The most common
explicit definition of biodiversity is in terms of 
species
richness
, often augmented with another characteristic (Maclaurin
& Sterelny 2008). Put simply, species richness is just the number
of species in a certain area. Measures of species richness usually
include another dimension, such as abundance (the number of
individuals in a population), evenness (the commonness or rarity of a
species), phenotypic disparity (how varied traits are in a group of
species) or evolutionary disparity (how far away species are in their
evolutionary trajectories) (Santana 2014).



The second approach is to define biodiversity 
implicitly
, by
specifying a set of rules or axioms,
“place-prioritization” algorithms, from which the concept
can be determined (Sarkar 2002). The basic idea is to identify which
parts of the world to preserve, when we only have a limited budget. We
start with a list of biodiversity surrogates (such as species, traits,
environmental parameters, along with various compositions of species,
subsets of species, and environmental parameters). We then carve up an
area into “cells” (of varying sizes) and identify which
surrogates appear in each cell. The algorithms can be used to
determine the smallest number of cells that need to be protected, so
that all surrogates are represented or, given a number of cells that
can be protected the algorithms can determine which cells should be
protected so as to maximize the number of surrogates that are
represented. So, biodiversity is defined as what the algorithms
determine should be prioritized.



Another view is to dispense with the concept entirely. Santana (2014,
2017) has argued that none of the existing definitions of biodiversity
are viable. Against species richness, he argues that it does not
capture all aspects of biological value. He points out that not all
areas or species are of equal value. For example, old growth forests
or rare biomes might be worth preserving even if they have lower
biodiversity than others. In contrast, some species such as certain
viruses are much less valuable and ought to be eliminated. He also
argues that many conceptions of biodiversity include other concepts,
such as stability which are controversial; he worries that these
connections can undermine conservation efforts. All in all, he argues
that the concept of biodiversity does more harm than good and should
therefore be eliminated. Only then will we able to focus on what
really matters, i.e., biological value.



For a more detailed overview of all the positions in
 
section 2.2
,
 see
 (
conservation biology
,
 
biodiversity
) and (Justus 2021: ch. 5). For more details on specific
views, see: for 
multidimensional approach/pluralism,

Maclaurin & Sterelny (2008), for 
implicit definitions
 of
biodiversity, Sarkar (2002, 2005) and discussion in Justus 2021, for

biodiversity eliminativism
, Santana (2014, 2017) and
responses to eliminativism, see (Burch-Brown & Archer 2017; Justus
2021).


3. Philosophy of Science in Ecology


3.1 The Scientific Status of Ecology



Ecologists display a striking degree of introspection regarding the
quality of ecological research and the overall scientific status of
their discipline. This is perhaps due to the historical development of
Ecology, where the introduction of mathematical models from physics
was viewed by many as an important step in the establishment of a
truly scientific discipline (Kingsland 1985 [1995]). Throughout its
history, ecologists have been at pains to distinguish their discipline
from natural history, which they viewed as a merely descriptive
endeavor, devoid of general theories and predictive power (Johnson
2007; Kingsland 1985 [1995]). These worries continue in the present.
There are a number of publications which lament the state of research
in ecology or its sub-disciplines because of alleged theoretical and
empirical failures, lack of progress, lack of unification across
methods or sub-disciplines, etc. (Courchamp, Dunne, et al. 2015;
Houlahan et al. 2017; Lawton 1996; Marquet et al. 2014; Peters 1991;
Scheiner & Willig 2011; Shrader-Frechette & McCoy 1993;
Valéry et al. 2013).



On the one hand, a certain level of introspection and concern about
the quality of research is an indicator of good practice, as it helps
to maintain standards and improve methods in a discipline. On the
other hand, however, too much concern can be counterproductive, as it
can undermine the efforts of practicing scientists. Indeed, the
importance placed on unificatory theories, predictive power and
mathematical models is sometimes described as “physics
envy” (Egler 1986; Kingsland 1985 [1995: 234]; McIntosh 1987;
Shrader-Frechette & McCoy 1993: 34). Moreover, these theoretical
concerns can be disproportionately damaging to some sub-disciplines,
where generalization and prediction are particularly difficult (see
 
§3.2
).
 For example, there have been calls to eliminate invasion biology as
an autonomous sub-discipline (Valéry et al. 2013), along with
calls to decrease the funding allocated to applied ecological research
in favor of fundamental (or pure) ecological research (see
 
§3.6

 for a discussion of the distinction) (Courchamp, Dunne et al.
2015).


3.2 Complexity



Complexity in ecology is a thorny topic, as there is no uncontested
definition of complexity, neither within, nor outside ecology
(Elliott-Graves, 2023). When ecologists talk about complexity, they
are usually referring to one or more characteristics of ecological
systems, that contribute to complexity. These characteristics include
having 
multiple parts
 (Levins 1966; Miller & Page 2007),

interaction
 between parts (in terms of the 
number
 of
interactions (connectance) and the 
strength
 of these
interactions (interaction strength) (Odenbaugh 2011; Pimm 1991),

non-linearity
 or 
feedback
 (a change in one factor
can result in a disproportional change in the behavior of the system)
and 
path dependence
 (a system's later states depend on their
previous states) (Levin 1998).


3.2.1 Characteristics of Ecological Complexity



A particularly important characteristic of complexity, both within and
outside ecology, is that their behavior amounts to more than the sum
of their parts (Mitchell 2003; Simon 1962). In other words, they have

emergent
 properties. Some emergent properties are considered
to be features of complexity in their own right. For example,

hierarchical organization
 of a system contributes to

self-organization
 and 
causal autonomy
 i.e., the
ability of the system to regulate its own states and creating and
maintaining the processes that enable it to function (Levin 2002,
2005). Emergence is important in broader terms, as it forms the basis
for an anti-reductionist approach to complex systems research
(Mitchell 2009). The idea is that because these properties are more
than the sum of their parts, investigating complex systems should
occur at the levels that these behaviors occur, rather than at lower
levels.



A characteristic of complexity which is particularly relevant to
ecological systems is 
heterogeneity
 (Elliott-Graves 2018;
Levins 1966; Matthewson 2011). Put simply, systems are heterogeneous
when their parts are not homogeneous, but vary in one or more ways.
Consider a suit of chainmail armor: it is made up of many interacting
metal rings, yet the rings are homogeneous, as each ring is almost
identical to the rest. In contrast, ecological systems display

intra-system heterogeneity
: each system is made up of many
different species and abiotic components. In fact, there are even
differences between individuals of the same species, in terms of how
they behave (Elliott-Graves 2018, 2023; Levins 1966). Ecological
systems also display 
inter-system heterogeneity
, i.e., there
are differences between systems (Elliott-Graves 2018, 2023; Matthewson
2011). For example, a forest and a grassland ecosystem may have
similar trophic levels, but they are made up of very different types
of species. Even two ecosystems of the same “type” e.g.,
two forests, often have very different species and/or display very
different dynamics and interactions.


3.2.2 The Effects of Complexity



Complexity is important in two very different ways for ecology. The
first is positive, in the sense that it explains some of
ecology’s fundamental questions: how are ecosystems possible?
How can they persist in the face of countless internal and external
disturbances? The idea is that complex communities (i.e., communities
that have diverse/heterogeneous interacting parts) are more stable,
that is able to adapt to changes such as fires, new competitors, new
predators or sudden climatic changes, without falling apart. This view
was famously disputed by Robert May (1973), who used mathematical
models to show that we should expect complex communities to be

less
 stable. The debate continues to this day, with
ecologists and philosophers of ecology using increasingly refined
notions of complexity, diversity and stability to argue for or against
the “diversity-stability” hypothesis (McCann 2000;
Odenbaugh 2011). Despite their differences regarding this hypothesis,
however, ecologists seem to have reached a certain consensus, agreeing
that complexity is a feature of healthy and mature ecological systems,
even though such systems may be susceptible to particular disturbances
(Hooper et al. 2005; Loreau et al. 2001; McCann 2000; Parrott
2010).



Complexity is also important in a negative sense, as it hinders the
study of ecological systems, creating difficulties for the collection
of data, the setup and interpretation of experiments, the construction
and interpretation of models, the predictability of system dynamics
and consequently the feasibility and success of interventions. The
complexity of ecological systems, especially in the form of dynamic
interactions, non-linearity, feedback and heterogeneity, make each
ecological phenomenon or system idiosyncratic, which hinders the
construction of generalizations and predictions. In other words, the
knowledge scientists acquire from studying one ecological system does
not transfer to other systems or to the same system in the future
(Elliott-Graves 2023; Levins 1966; Matthewson 2011). For example,
explanations of community structures that were based on the keystone
species concept have subsequently been proven to be false, as it turns
out that keystone species do not behave in the same way across
different systems (Cottee-Jones & Whittaker 2012). Similarly,
predictions can fail when underlying patterns change or break. For
example, species distribution models (SDMs) are often used to predict
the range of a species colonizing a new area, by projecting variables
of the species’ native niche to the new area (Sobek-Swant et al.
2012). However, climate change can render these predictions
inaccurate, e.g., unexpected higher temperatures or fewer extreme cold
events can increase a species’ range to regions that it would
normally not be able to colonize (Cuddington et al. 2018).


3.3 Laws



A related issue is that of laws. In traditional accounts of philosophy
of science, uncovering laws of nature is an important goal of
scientific research and a hallmark of a mature, successful scientific
discipline (Colyvan & Ginzburg 2003; Mitchell 2000). There are
numerous and differing accounts of how to define laws of nature (see
 
laws of nature
).
 A simple reconstruction of the traditional view of laws is the
following: laws of nature are generalizations that are necessarily
true (i.e., not accidental), and hold in all space and time without
any exceptions (Mitchell 2000). Candidates for lawhood in ecology have
included the principle of competitive exclusion, density-dependent
population regulation, equilibrium theory of island biogeography,
optimality models, supply-side ecology and metapopulation theory and
allometric scaling laws (Beck 1997; Justus 2021; Raerinne 2011).



The problem is that in the biological sphere, most generalizations
“fail” on all three counts. For a start, biological
entities and their interactions are contingent on evolutionary
history, i.e., they are historical accidents, so any generalizations
about them or their causal relations cannot be necessary truths
(Mitchell 2003). Second, the complexity of biological systems means
that generalizations are far from exceptionless, but only hold in
certain contexts (see
 
§3.2
).
 Third, generalizations tend to apply to subsets of organisms, so they
are far from universal. All of the candidates for lawhood mentioned in
the previous paragraph have been overturned, due to the emergence of
empirical counterexamples (Beck 1997; Raerinne 2011).



There are roughly three ways for how to interpret these
“failures”, in ecology. The first is that these are indeed
failures, and a discipline without laws is not truly scientific
(Lawton 1999; Peters 1991). The second view is to concede that ecology
does not have laws in the traditional sense, but that this does not
diminish the scientific status of the discipline (Beck 1997;
Shrader-Frechette & McCoy 1993) (see
 
§3.1.
).
 The third view is to argue that if, on this definition of laws of
nature, ecology does not have laws, then the fault lies with the
definition of laws, as it is unnecessarily strong (Colyvan &
Ginzburg 2003; Linquist et al. 2016). The classic dichotomies
(necessary/accidental, universal/contingent) are not useful for
practicing scientists, as the point of generalizations is that they
help scientists achieve various goals, such as explaining and
predicting natural phenomena or intervening on the world. In this
context, the most important characteristic of ecological laws is that
they are invariant, stable or resilient, i.e., they persist for long
enough, in certain contexts to be detected and to be used to make
predictions (though what exactly long enough etc. means is also a
matter of debate) (Colyvan & Ginzburg 2003; Linquist et al. 2016.
For a more detailed discussion of laws in ecology see Elliott-Graves
2023). Finally, Raerinne (Raerinne 2011, 2013, 2015) merges aspects of
all three views, arguing that the aspect of laws that we should care
about is the fact that they are generalizations that are invariant and
extrapolatable. If ecological generalizations are invariant, then they
are sufficient for generating explanations, so whether or not they are
laws is beside the question.


3.4 Levels



Debates and discussions about levels in philosophy of science are
quite complicated, as they bring together ontological, epistemic and
methodological issues from philosophy and many different sciences
(Brooks et al. 2021). The issues concerning levels in ecology can be
situated within the more general discussion of organizational levels
in biology
 (
levels of organization in biology
).
 The main view that is relevant for ecology is the traditional
“layer-cake”
 account.
[
1
]

 Historically, this view held sway in philosophy of science for many
years and is still prevalent in many sciences (including ecology)
 (
levels of organization in biology
).
 Roughly, it states that the world is organized hierarchically, and
each level of nature corresponds to a science that studies it. Things
become complicated when we are trying to determine what counts as a
level, whether all levels are equal or whether some are more
fundamental or should be prioritized in science. Thus, for example,
reductionists tend to prioritize the smaller levels, while
anti-reductionists tend to look at the higher levels for explaining
and predicting scientific phenomena. Due to space considerations, this
is a very loose characterization of all these views; for more detailed
explanations see
 (
reductionism in biology
,
 
scientific reduction
,
 
levels of organization in biology
,
 
units and levels of selection
,
 
mechanisms in science
,
 
emergent properties
,
 
supervenience
).



The traditional layer-cake approach together with its disagreements
about the relative importance of each level is plainly apparent in
ecology (though ecologists tend to use the term 
scale
 rather
than level), starting from the fact that different ecological units
(individuals, populations, communities and ecosystems) are distinct
sub-disciplines with their own methodologies (see
 
§2.1

 &
 
§3.5
).
 Indeed, the influential conservation biologist Reed Noss claimed
that





many of the most persistent controversies in ecology can be traced to
different parties viewing a situation at different spatial or temporal
scales … The scale at which Nature is viewed determines the
patterns and processes detected. (Noss 1992: 240).





Ontological considerations of scale have a long history in ecology.
For example, Odum’s seminal textbook for ecology (Odum 1953),
adds populations and communities to the hierarchy of organizational
levels in biology (cell, tissue, organ, organism). Two decades later,
O’Neill et al., extended the ontological hierarchy to ecosystems
(O’Neill et al. 1986). As shown in
 
section 2.1
,
 there are also ongoing debates in philosophy of ecology about the
ontological status of various ecological units, e.g., populations,
communities and ecosystems, including whether each of these units is a
mere aggregate, a whole or an individual, and whether or not they
reflect a real natural category (Lean 2018; Millstein 2009; Odenbaugh
2007, 2010; Stegenga 2010). Ecological discussions of scale have also
focused on the importance of time as a scale, i.e., how long it takes
for a phenomenon or process to take place. Ecologists developed a
hierarchy where time-scales constrain other organizational scales,
e.g., photosynthesis versus tree growth (O’Neill et al. 1986).
According to James DiFrisco (2017), this prioritization of time scale
over other organizational scales is an important conceptual
innovation, which allows the whole organizational concept of scale to
overcome many of the criticisms leveled against it (e.g., by Angela
Potochnik, 2021).



Ecologists are also concerned with the epistemic effects of scale in
ecology. Ecological phenomena and processes happen at multiple scales
(e.g., populations, ecosystems, seasons, generations) and the scale at
which a phenomenon manifests is often not easy to investigate, so
measurements must occur at other (usually smaller) scales and results
extrapolated to the level of interest (Schneider 2001). A typical
example of “the problem of scale”, as it has been named,
is biodiversity loss (see
 
§2.4
),
 where measuring biodiversity necessarily happens at small areas, yet
the effect of species extinction manifests at the level of ecosystems.
As species numbers do not scale directly with increases in
geographical area, there is always a discrepancy between the sample
measures of biodiversity and their extrapolation to the whole
ecosystem (Chase & Knight 2013; Schneider 2001).


3.5 Methods



The main research methods used in ecology are mathematical and
computational models, experiments, observational studies along with a
variety of statistical tools for data collection, analysis,
interpretation and synthesis. Historically, research at various levels
and types of ecosystem were predominantly associated with certain
methods, e.g., aquatic ecosystems focusing on population or
community-level models, island biogeography focusing on field
experiments etc. (Resetarits & Bernardo 1998; Hairston 1989;
Kingsland 1985 [1995], 2005). However, with greater recognition of the
advantages and disadvantages of each method along with technological
advances in data collection and computation power, methods are
becoming increasingly integrated across ecological scales and
sub-disciplines (Kareiva, Parker, & Pascuel 1996; Kareiva &
Andersen 1988; Peck 2004).


3.5.1 Models



Mathematical modeling is an integral part of ecological research
(Odenbaugh 2019b). In fact, for many ecologists, Ecology only became a
truly scientific discipline with the development and extensive use of
mathematical models (Kingsland 1985 [1995], 2005). The history of
ecology is punctuated with influential models, such as models of
population growth (Reed & Pearl 1927), the Lotka-Volterra
predation and competition models (Knuuttila & Loettgers 2017;
Weisberg 2007b), Species distribution models (such as GARP and MAXENT;
Sobek-Swant et al. 2012; Townsend Peterson et al. 2007) and Ecosystem
Network Models (such as ECOPATH and ECOSIM; Heymans et al. 2016).


Model Complexity



An important and ongoing debate in the literature on ecological
modeling concerns the appropriate level of complexity that should be
incorporated into mathematical models. In the first camp are those who
argue that models should be simple so as to 
reduce
 the
inherent complexity of systems, making them more tractable and
generalizable (Hitchcock & Sober 2004; Perretti, Munch &
Sugihara 2013). The rationale is that reducing complexity allows
scientists to distinguish between the core causal factors that give
rise to classes of phenomena and mere details that are idiosyncratic
to particular systems. In the second camp are those who believe that
models should 
incorporate
 complexity, so as to provide more
accurate pictures of complex systems (Essington et al. 2017; Evans et
al. 2013; Travis et al. 2014). The rationale here is that mirroring
the complexity of real-world systems ensures that the models will
capture all the relevant causal factors and dynamics giving rise to
complex phenomena.



A more nuanced conceptual framework for modeling in Ecology comes from
the work of Richard Levins (Elliott-Graves 2020a; Levins 1966, 1993;
Weisberg 2007a). Levins argues that biological systems are incredibly
complex, so much so that it is impractical to capture all the
complexity in a single model. Even if it were feasible to construct
such a model, its results would make little sense to us. Moreover,
models are used for different purposes, such as understanding
phenomena, making predictions and intervening on the world. Thus,
rather than attempting to determine 
the
 optimal level of
model complexity, Levins argues that what counts as optimal in each
case will depend on the system being studied and the model’s
intended use. More specifically, Levins identifies three desiderata
for model-building: realism, generality and precision. Realism refers
to how accurately a model captures the causal structure of the world;
models are realistic when they are not overly simplified or idealized.
Models are general when they apply to many systems in the world and
precise when their outputs are finely specified (Levins 1966, 1993).
Due to the complexity of biological systems, scientists can maximize
only two out of the three desiderata. This gives rise to three
strategies for model building along with three corresponding types of
models. Type I models (such as the Lotka-Volterra population dynamics
models) sacrifice realism for precision and generality, Type II
models, (such as species distribution models and ecosystem network
models) sacrifice generality for realism and precision and Type III
models (such as loop analysis and fuzzy interaction webs) sacrifice
precision for generality and realism.


Model Pluralism



According to Levins, scientists need not choose between models, but
can (and should) be pluralists and use multiple strategies. There are
two ways in which model pluralism can be conceptualized. The first
concerns the discipline of ecology as a whole: different research
questions or different phenomena call for different models. Thus,
there will be cases where generality is more important, others in
which predictive accuracy is more important and so on. In each of
these cases a different type of model might be most useful. The second
conceptualization of model pluralism (which Levins also supported) is
stronger and concerns each particular scientific investigation. Here,
the idea is that scientists should use multiple models (ideally from
different strategies) to investigate a particular phenomenon. As long
as the models are independent from each other, then they can cancel
out, or at least mitigate, each other’s errors and biases. If we
are very lucky, the model outputs will converge, yielding

inferential robustness
, which can increase our confidence in
the models (Justus 2012). In Levins’s own words, “truth is
at the intersection of independent lies” (1966: 423).



For an argument against Levins’s proposed trade-off framework
see (Orzack 2005; Orzack & Sober 1993). For Levins’s
response to these criticisms, see (Levins 1993). For discussion and
refinement of Levins’s framework see (Elliott-Graves 2020a,
2023; Justus 2005, 2012; Odenbaugh 2003; Weisberg 2007a).


3.5.2 Experiments



As is the case with other disciplines, philosophers of ecology tend to
focus more on the theoretical aspects of scientific practice
 (
experiment in biology
,
 see also
 
§3.1
),
 which includes theory building and testing, model construction and
how models provide information about the real world (Elliott-Graves
2020b; Odenbaugh 2001; Weisberg 2007b). Nonetheless, experiments have
an important place in ecological research, because of the sheer
quantity of experimental research and because of the epistemic
implications of experimentation. Just as with experiments in other
disciplines, there are worries about the epistemic conclusions that
can be drawn
 (
experiment in biology
).
 The aim of experiments is to make causal inferences, by identifying
connections between causes and effects (Millstein 2019). The problem
is that it is not always easy to establish these causal connections:
experiments can simply fail to establish any causal connection, the
causal connection may be limited to the experimental setup, or even an
artifact of the experimental setup
 (
experiment in biology
).
 In ecology, experiments are very heterogeneous, in terms of the type
of experimental setup and the level at which they are conducted. In
this context, heterogeneity is useful, at it can help us understand
and categorize the epistemic issues arising from experimentation in
ecology.



Ecological experiments can be divided into three categories,

laboratory
, 
field
 and 
natural
 experiments,
each of which has epistemic advantages and disadvantages (Diamond
1986; Millstein 2019). Laboratory experiments are those where the
perturbations are produced by the experimenter in the laboratory
(Diamond 1986). The main advantage of laboratory experiments is that
the experimenter has greater control over the biotic and abiotic
environment, which is thought to provide greater confidence in the
causal inferences that can be made from the experiment (Millstein
2019). However, this control comes at a cost: the laboratory setting
is an artificial environment, that isolates phenomenon being
investigated from the complex causal network it normally operates in.
This means that the causal inferences established in the laboratory
setting might not extend outside the laboratory (this is sometimes
referred to as low external validity (Guala 2003). Natural experiments
are much more realistic than laboratory experiments, because they do
not take place in the artificial setting of the laboratory and can
include many more species and perturbations (Millstein 2019). However,
as the experimenter has no control over these variables their results
yield much weaker causal inferences (this is sometimes referred to as
low internal validity (Guala 2003). Field experiments fall in between
laboratory and natural experiments in both dimensions, in the sense
that they afford the experimenter some level of control but are also
much less artificial than laboratory experiments as they provide
scientists with more complete picture of the phenomenon under
investigation (Diamond 1986; Thrush et al. 2000).



Ecological field studies, (i.e., field experiments and observational
studies), deserve some additional attention, as they had an important
role in the development of ecology as a scientific discipline (Sagarin
& Pauchard 2010). The recognition that something is lost when
populations are isolated in the laboratory, and that it is important
to be able to observe community dynamics in all their complexity
formed the basis of an alternative approach the study of ecological
systems. This approach has been criticized regularly by both modelers
and laboratory ecologists as un-scientific (see
 
§3.1

 and
 
§3.5.1
),
 yet it has persisted, in many parts and sub-disciplines of ecology,
such as Elton’s niche theory and approach to the study of
biological invaders
 (
§2.2

 and
 
§2.3
)
 ecosystem ecology and modeling
 (
§2.1

 and
 
§3.5.1
)
 and island biogeography. An important early landmark in the
establishment of this general approach was the theory of

succession
 (i.e., how a community develops after a
disturbance such as a forest fire), whose ascent in the late
nineteenth century was supported by a study of the regular patterns of
vegetation variation on the sand dunes surrounding Lake Michigan, led
by Henry Cowles. This, along with other field studies, showed that
ecological systems outside the laboratory could have repeatable and
predictable patterns which could form the basis of a theory (see
discussion in Inkpen 2017).


3.6 Functions



Talk of “functions” is pervasive in ecology, in numerous
contexts and at various scales, such as ecosystem functioning,
functional diversity, functional types and so on (Jax 2005, 2010;
Morrow 2023; Odenbaugh 2010, 2019a). Most ecological views on the
nature and role of functions are closer to views in general philosophy
of science than those in philosophy of biology. The main reason for
this is that philosophers of ecology reject the traditional

selected-effect
 view of functions, in the context of ecology
(Dussault 2018; Maclaurin & Sterelny 2008; Morrow 2023; Nunes-Neto
et al. 2014). The selected-effect view states that the function a
trait is the activity that it was selected for performing. For
example, the human heart has the function of circulating blood if, and
only if, it evolved to do so by natural selection in the recent past
(Godfrey-Smith 1994; Odenbaugh 2019a).



The problem with this account, for the ecological context, is that
evidence about evolutionary history is not needed when making
functional explanations in ecology (Dussault 2018; Morrow 2023;
Odenbaugh 2019a). Some philosophers argue that they are better
described as the roles of parts of an ecosystem that help explain the
behavior of the ecosystem. The 
systemic capacity
 or

causal role
 accounts of ecological function are based on
Cummins’s (1975) view, which roughly states that a component of
a system has a function when the capacity of a component helps to
explain a capacity of the system (Lean 2021; Maclaurin & Sterelny
2008; Odenbaugh 2019a). For example, the capacity of detritivores to
break down litter, help to explain the capacity of ecosystems to
recycle nitrogen. One issue regarding role functions is whether they
permit malfunctions, for example whether invasive species are
dysfunctional. On a causal role theory, invasive species do not count
as dysfunctional, which goes against some people’s intuitions
(Lean 2021, see also discussion in Morrow 2023). Other open questions
regarding causal role accounts are whether it is legitimate to assign
functional roles to abiotic parts of the environment (Odenbaugh 2010)
and whether they accurately identify the explanatory targets of
ecologists (i.e., what ecologists are actually interested in
explaining) (Dussault 2018).



Two other views are the 
persistence
 accounts, where functions
contribute to the persistence of the system they are a part of
(Dussault 2018), and the 
organizational
 accounts, where
functions can roughly be understood as components that help to
maintain the organization of the system they are a part of (Moreno
& Mossio 2015; Nunes-Neto et al. 2014). Finally, Millstein (2020)
argues that role functions are 
coevolved,
 so they can be
understood as a type of selected effect function. For example, the
function of pollinators is to help flowering plants to reproduce,
because flowering plants and pollinators have coevolved together.



A parallel issue is whether role functions can be integrated or
unified with other accounts of function in biology, or whether it is
best to adopt a pluralistic account of functions for different
contexts (Lean 2021; Morrow 2023). It is also possible to be a
pluralist in a different sense, namely allowing that different
functions exist at different levels of ecological hierarchy (see
 
§3.4
).
 For example, Odenbaugh (2019a) argues that Millstein’s version
of selected effects functions can occur at the community level, yet
only systemic capacity functions occur at the level of ecosystems.


3.7 Ecology as an Applied Science



There is a long-standing distinction in philosophy of science between
science that is “pure” “basic” or
“fundamental” and science that is “applied”
(Douglas 2014; Roll-Hansen 2017). Historically, the distinction was
meant to separate research that focused on building theoretical
knowledge from research that merely applied the existing knowledge to
solve particular problems in the real world (Carrier & Nordmann
2011; Douglas 2014). However, this distinction has been criticized, as
many scientific disciplines, ecology included, routinely blend aspects
of both pure and applied research (Douglas 2009; Kitcher 2001). Still,
some philosophers have pointed out the distinction can be meaningful,
as some research focuses on discovering and explaining phenomena while
others focus more on identifying and solving problems in the world
(Elliott-Graves, 2023; Justus 2021). Moreover, while 
epistemic
values
 (those that directly help with the attainment of
knowledge, such as truth, empirical adequacy, explanatory power,
simplicity, generality, theoretical unity etc.) are important for both
pure and applied research, in applied research, contextual values
(sometimes called 
non-epistemic
 values) (those that arise
from the social and/or ethical context within which a scientific
investigation takes place) are particularly important (Douglas 2000;
Justus 2021; Longino 1990; McMullin 1982; Rolin 2016; see also
 
feminist epistemology and philosophy of science

 and
 
scientific objectivity
).


3.7.1 Values



It is uncontroversial to say that a significant proportion of
ecological research is 
value-laden
. For example, conservation
biology
 (
§2.4
)
 is inherently and inescapably “ethically driven”, as
ethical values affect how concepts such as biodiversity and nature are
defined and measured, and how choices for various strategies for
conservation are made and evaluated (Justus 2021,
 
conservation biology
).
 Nonetheless, there is some disagreement between philosophers about
the role that non-epistemic values should play in applied sciences. On
one view, termed “fact-value entanglement”, facts and
non-epistemic values are inextricably linked and inseparable (Douglas
2009; Kincaid et al. 2007). Examples are often framed in terms of

inductive risk
, which can roughly be defined as the risk of
accepting a hypothesis that is false or rejecting a hypothesis that is
true (Magnus 2022). The idea is that there is always a level of
uncertainty when it comes to accepting or rejecting a hypothesis, and
that non-epistemic values play an important (though often overlooked)
role in whether a hypothesis is accepted or rejected. Thus, for
example, if we are trying to determine whether or not to allow logging
in an area home to an endangered species (an example from the
literature is that of the Northern Spotted Owl, see
 
conservation biology
,
 Justus 2021), the decision will be influenced by ethical
considerations for the species in question, but also by considerations
for the livelihood of the loggers, the local economy and so on.



One argument against this view, particularly relevant to ecology, is
that focusing on non-epistemic values is problematic for the purposes
of policy making, because if policies for conservation include
non-epistemic values and these values are not widely shared, then the
policy in question is unlikely to be successfully implemented (Burke
& Lauenroth 2009; see discussion in
 
conservation biology
).
 Instead, the argument goes, facts are not only distinguishable from
other values, but it is more likely to convince people (policy makers
and the general public) that a policy will be successful if it focuses
exclusively on the facts and does not bring in contextual values.
Similarly, Justus (2021) argues that while non-epistemic values are
important in applied ecology, it is possible to distinguish between
fact and non-epistemic values. He argues that there has been
conceptual and methodological progress in conservation biology, with
the adoption of new and better methods for conservation planning. The
adoption of these new methods, however, is due to considerations of
facts and epistemic values, rather than non-epistemic values.


3.7.2 Interdisciplinarity



Interdisciplinarity and its relations are yet more concepts that are
difficult to define (Grüne-Yanoff 2016; Klein 2010; Mäki
2016). For the purposes of this entry, we can understand
interdisciplinarity as the collaborative integration of different
disciplines for a common goal (Klein 2010).


Ecology & Evolution



There have been many instances throughout this entry, where the
ecological definition or approach to a topic differed significantly to
its evolutionary counterpart (e.g.,
 
§2.1.3
,
 
§3.6
). Nonetheless, there are some research programs that
bridge the gap between ecology and evolution. One such program that
has received a lot of philosophical attention is 
niche


construction
. Put simply, niche construction occurs when
organisms alter their environment, thus constructing their niche
(Odling-Smee et al. 2013). For example, animals build nests, burrows
and other artifacts, plants change the amount of nutrients or other
chemicals in the soil and air and so on (Laland et al. 2016). By
altering their environment in these ways, organisms change or create
new selection pressures, thus influencing their own evolution (Levins
& Lewontin 1985). There are roughly two parts to the process of
niche construction. The first is the construction of the niche, for
example through 
ecosystem engineering
, where organisms
actively alter their environment (Odling-Smee et al. 2013). Some
biologists adopt a broader notion of “construction” to
include behavioral changes, such as choosing a certain habitat,
migration between habitats and various forms of adjustment or
specialization (Odling-Smee et al. 2013; Trappes et al. 2022). The
second part of niche construction is the effect of these changes on
the evolution of the organisms. Changing the environment can change
the selective pressures on the organisms within that environment,
e.g., by adding or removing limiting factors such as temperature or
shade. However, these effects are also explained by other
adaptationist accounts of evolution, such as Richard Dawkins’s
“extended phenotype” concept (Dawkins 1982 [1999]). Niche
construction proper includes “ecological inheritance”,
where populations pass on the modified environment to their offspring
(see also
 
inheritance systems
).



Despite the potential of interdisciplinarity between ecology and
evolution, Stephan Linquist (2019) argues that the two disciplines
actually occupy “distinct epistemic niches”. He points out
that some ecological explanations do not benefit from evolutionary
details and vice versa. Therefore, scientists should investigate
whether a combined eco-evo approach is likely to be fruitful for their
research project, rather than assuming it is the best option.


Ecology and Economics



A notable example of methodological integration is the adoption of
economic models into ecology and the subsequent cross-pollination of
ideas between the two disciplines (Justus 2014; MacLeod & Nagatsu
2016; O’Malley & Soyer 2012). An important landmark was the
adoption of Agent Based models from decision and game theory into
ecology and their development into Individual-Based models. The
adoption of these models spearheaded a recognition that many classical
models in ecology were overly simplistic and unrealistic and
highlighted the importance of adding more detail to ecological models
(Railsback & Grimm 2011). At the same time, it has contributed to
the adoption of “methodological individualism” as a
genuine approach in ecology, which advances an individualistic
understanding of the world, with moderate but not extreme levels of
reductionism (Justus 2014; see also
 
§2.1.4.

 &
 
§3.4
).



However, it should also be noted that some interdisciplinary endeavors
between ecology and economics are widely criticized. For example, the
field of ecological economics sought to monetize 
ecosystem
services
, so as to incorporate biodiversity and conservation
goals into cost-benefit analyses, but has been criticized by
economists and conservation biologists for failing to live up to
expectations of either field (Norton & Noonan 2007).






Bibliography




Antonovics, Janis, 1992, “Toward Community Genetics”,
in 
Plant Resistance to Herbivores and Pathogens: Ecology,
Evolution, and Genetics
, Robert S. Fritz and Ellen Louise Simms
(eds), Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 426–449 (ch.
18).


Bausman, William, 2019, “The Aims and Structures of
Ecological Research Programs”, 
Philosophical Topics
,
47(1): 1–20. doi:10.5840/philtopics20194711


Beck, Michael W., 1997, “Inference and Generality in
Ecology: Current Problems and an Experimental Solution”,

Oikos
, 78(2): 265–273. doi:10.2307/3546293


Berger, Uta, Cyril Piou, Katja Schiffers, and Volker Grimm, 2008,
“Competition among Plants: Concepts, Individual-Based Modelling
Approaches, and a Proposal for a Future Research Strategy”,

Perspectives in Plant Ecology, Evolution and Systematics
,
9(3–4): 121–135. doi:10.1016/j.ppees.2007.11.002


Blackburn, Tim M., Petr Pyšek, Sven Bacher, James T.
Carlton, Richard P. Duncan, Vojtěch Jarošík, John
R.U. Wilson, and David M. Richardson, 2011, “A Proposed Unified
Framework for Biological Invasions”, 
Trends in Ecology &
Evolution
, 26(7): 333–339.
doi:10.1016/j.tree.2011.03.023


Brooks, Daniel S., James DiFrisco, and William C. Wimsatt (eds),
2021, 
Levels of Organization in the Biological Sciences
,
(Vienna Series in Theoretical Biology), Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
doi:10.7551/mitpress/12389.001.0001


Burch-Brown, Joanna and Alfred Archer, 2017, “In Defence of
Biodiversity”, 
Biology & Philosophy
, 32(6):
969–997. doi:10.1007/s10539-017-9587-x


Burke, Indy and Bill Lauenroth, 2009,
“‘Environmentalist’ Label Not in Our Best
Interests”, 
Frontiers in Ecology and the Environment
,
7(5): 240–240. doi:10.1890/09.WB.016


Callicott, J. Baird, 1995, “The Value of Ecosystem
Health”, 
Environmental Values
, 4(4): 345–361.
doi:10.1177/096327199500400403


Carrier, Martin and Alfred Nordmann, 2011, “Science in the
Context of Application: Methodological Change, Conceptual
Transformation, Cultural Reorientation”, in 
Science in the
Context of Application
, Martin Carrier and Alfred Nordmann
(eds.), (Boston Studies in the Philosophy of Science, 274), Dordrecht:
Springer Netherlands, 1–7. doi:10.1007/978-90-481-9051-5_1


Catford, Jane A., Roland Jansson, and Christer Nilsson, 2009,
“Reducing Redundancy in Invasion Ecology by Integrating
Hypotheses into a Single Theoretical Framework”, 
Diversity
and Distributions
, 15(1): 22–40.
doi:10.1111/j.1472-4642.2008.00521.x


Chase, Jonathan M. and Tiffany M. Knight, 2013,
“Scale‐dependent Effect Sizes of Ecological Drivers on
Biodiversity: Why Standardised Sampling Is Not Enough”,

Ecology Letters
, 16(s1): 17–26.
doi:10.1111/ele.12112


Chase, Jonathan M. and Mathew A. Leibold, 2003, 
Ecological
Niches: Linking Classical and Contemporary Approaches
,
(Interspecific Interactions), Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.


Chesson, Peter, 2000, “Mechanisms of Maintenance of Species
Diversity”, 
Annual Review of Ecology and Systematics
,
31(1): 343–366. doi:10.1146/annurev.ecolsys.31.1.343


Colautti, Robert I. and David M. Richardson, 2009,
“Subjectivity and Flexibility in Invasion Terminology: Too Much
of a Good Thing?”, 
Biological Invasions
, 11(6):
1225–1229. doi:10.1007/s10530-008-9333-z


Colyvan, M. and L. R. Ginzburg, 2003, “Laws of Nature and
Laws of Ecology”, 
Oikos
, 101(3): 649–653.
doi:10.1034/j.1600-0706.2003.12349.x


Colyvan, Mark, Stefan Linquist, William Grey, Paul E. Griffiths,
Jay Odenbaugh, and Hugh P. Possingham, 2009, “Philosophical
Issues in Ecology: Recent Trends and Future Directions”,

Ecology and Society
, 14(2): article 22.
doi:10.5751/ES-03020-140222


Cooper, Gregory J., 2003, 
The Science of the Struggle for
Existence: On the Foundations of Ecology
, Cambridge/New York:
Cambridge University Press. doi:10.1017/CBO9780511720154


Cooper, Gregory J. and Lawrence E. Hurd, 2019, “The House
and the Household: Habitat, Demographic Independence, and Ecological
Populations”, 
Philosophical Topics
, 47(1): 21–43.
doi:10.5840/philtopics20194712


Cottee-Jones, Henry Eden W. and Robert J. Whittaker, 2012,
“Perspective: The Keystone Species Concept: A Critical
Appraisal”, 
Frontiers of Biogeography
, 4(3):
117–127. doi:10.21425/F5FBG12533


Courchamp, Franck, Jennifer A. Dunne, Yvon Le Maho, Robert M. May,
Christophe Thébaud, and Michael E. Hochberg, 2015,
“Fundamental Ecology Is Fundamental”, 
Trends in
Ecology & Evolution
, 30(1): 9–16.
doi:10.1016/j.tree.2014.11.005


Courchamp, Franck, Philip E. Hulme, and Petr Pyšek, 2020,
“Invasion Biology and Uncertainty in Native Range Definitions:
Response to Pereyra 2019”, 
Conservation Biology
, 34(4):
1041–1043. doi:10.1111/cobi.13528


Cuddington, Kim, Stephanie Sobek-Swant, Jill C. Crosthwaite, D.
Barry Lyons, and Brent J. Sinclair, 2018, “Probability of
Emerald Ash Borer Impact for Canadian Cities and North America: A
Mechanistic Model”, 
Biological Invasions
, 20(9):
2661–2677. doi:10.1007/s10530-018-1725-0


Cummins, Robert, 1975, “Functional Analysis”,

Journal of Philosophy
, 72, 741–765.


Davis, Mark A., 2006, “Invasion Biology 1958–2005: The
Pursuit of Science and Conservation”, in 
Conceptual Ecology
and Invasion Biology: Reciprocal Approaches to Nature
, Marc
William Cadotte, Sean M. Mcmahon, and Tadashi Fukami (eds), Dordrecht:
Kluwer Academic Publishers, 35–64.
doi:10.1007/1-4020-4925-0_3


Davis, Mark A., Matthew K. Chew, Richard J. Hobbs, Ariel E. Lugo,
John J. Ewel, Geerat J. Vermeij, James H. Brown, Michael L.
Rosenzweig, Mark R. Gardener, Scott P. Carroll, Ken Thompson, Steward
T. A. Pickett, Juliet C. Stromberg, Peter Del Tredici, Katharine N.
Suding, Joan G. Ehrenfeld, J. Philip Grime, Joseph Mascaro, and John
C. Briggs, 2011, “Don’t Judge Species on Their
Origins”, 
Nature
, 474(7350): 153–154.
doi:10.1038/474153a


Davis, Mark A., J. Philip Grime, and Ken Thompson, 2000,
“Fluctuating Resources in Plant Communities: A General Theory of
Invasibility”, 
Journal of Ecology
, 88(3):
528–534. doi:10.1046/j.1365-2745.2000.00473.x


Dawkins, Richard, 1982 [1999], 
The Extended Phenotype: The
Gene as the Unit of Selection
, Oxford/San Francisco: W.H.
Freeman. Revised as 
The Extended Phenotype: The Long Reach of the
Gene
, Oxford ; New York: Oxford University Press,
1999.


Desjardins, Eric, 2015, “Historicity and Ecological
Restoration”, 
Biology & Philosophy
, 30(1):
77–98. doi:10.1007/s10539-014-9467-6


Diamond, Jared, 1986, “Overview: Laboratory Experiments,
Field Experiments and Natural Experiments”, in 
Community
Ecology
, Jared M. Diamond and Ted J. Case (eds.), New York:
Harper & Row, 3–22.


DiFrisco, James, 2017, “Time Scales and Levels of
Organization”, 
Erkenntnis
, 82(4): 795–818.
doi:10.1007/s10670-016-9844-4


Douglas, Heather E., 2000, “Inductive Risk and Values in
Science”, 
Philosophy of Science
, 67(4): 559–579.
doi:10.1086/392855


–––, 2009, 
Science, Policy, and the
Value-Free Ideal
, Pittsburgh, PA: University of Pittsburgh
Press.


–––, 2014, “Pure Science and the Problem
of Progress”, 
Studies in History and Philosophy of Science
Part A
, 46: 55–63. doi:10.1016/j.shpsa.2014.02.001


Dussault, Antoine C., 2018, “Functional Ecology’s
Non-Selectionist Understanding of Function”, 
Studies in
History and Philosophy of Science Part C: Studies in History and
Philosophy of Biological and Biomedical Sciences
, 70: 1–9.
doi:10.1016/j.shpsc.2018.05.001


Egler, Frank E., 1986, “‘Physics Envy’ in
Ecology”, 
Bulletin of the Ecological Society of
America
, 67(3): 233–235. doi:10.2307/20166525


Eliot, Christopher, 2011, “The Legend of Order and Chaos:
Communities and Early Community Ecology”, in 
Philosophy of
Ecology
, Kevin deLaplante, Bryson Brown, and Kent A. Peacock
(eds), (Handbook of the Philosophy of Science 11), Oxford: Elsevier,
49–107. doi:10.1016/B978-0-444-51673-2.50003-0


Elliott-Graves, Alkistis, 2016, “The Problem of Prediction
in Invasion Biology”, 
Biology & Philosophy
, 31(3):
373–393. doi:10.1007/s10539-015-9504-0


–––, 2018, “Generality and Causal
Interdependence in Ecology”, 
Philosophy of Science
,
85(5): 1102–1114. doi:10.1086/699698


–––, 2019, “The Future of Predictive
Ecology”, 
Philosophical Topics
, 47(1): 65–82.
doi:10.5840/philtopics20194714


–––, 2020a, “The Value of Imprecise
Prediction”, 
Philosophy, Theory, and Practice in
Biology
, 12: article 20220112).
doi:10.3998/ptpbio.16039257.0012.004


–––, 2020b, “What Is a Target
System?”, 
Biology & Philosophy
, 35(2): article 28.
doi:10.1007/s10539-020-09745-3


–––, 2023, 
Ecological Complexity
,
(Elements in the Philosophy of Biology), Cambridge/New York: Cambridge
University Press. doi:10.1017/9781108900010


Elton, Charles S., 1927, 
Animal Ecology
, (Text-Books of
Animal Biology), New York: Macmillan.
 [
Elton 1927 available online
]


–––, 1958, 
The Ecology of Invasions by
Animals and Plants
, London: Methuen.


Enders, Martin, Frank Havemann, Florian Ruland, Maud
Bernard‐Verdier, Jane A. Catford, Lorena
Gómez‐Aparicio, Sylvia Haider, Tina Heger, Christoph
Kueffer, Ingolf Kühn, Laura A. Meyerson, Camille Musseau, Ana
Novoa, Anthony Ricciardi, Alban Sagouis, Conrad Schittko, David L.
Strayer, Montserrat Vilà, Franz Essl, Philip E. Hulme, et al.,
2020, “A Conceptual Map of Invasion Biology: Integrating
Hypotheses into a Consensus Network”, 
Global Ecology and
Biogeography
, 29(6): 978–991. doi:10.1111/geb.13082


Essington, Timothy E., Lorenzo Ciannelli, Selina S. Heppell,
Phillip S. Levin, Timothy R. McClanahan, Fiorenza Micheli, Éva
E. Plagányi, and Ingrid E. van Putten, 2017, “Empiricism
and modeling for marine fisheries: advancing an interdisciplinary
science”, 
Ecosystems
, 20: 237–244.


Evans, Matthew R., Volker Grimm, Karin Johst, Tarja Knuuttila,
Rogier De Langhe, Catherine M. Lessells, Martina Merz, Maureen A.
O’Malley, Steve H. Orzack, Michael Weisberg, Darren J.
Wilkinson, Olaf Wolkenhauer, and Tim G. Benton, 2013, “Do Simple
Models Lead to Generality in Ecology?”, 
Trends in Ecology
& Evolution
, 28(10): 578–583.
doi:10.1016/j.tree.2013.05.022


Frank, David M., Daniel Simberloff, Jordan Bush, Angela Chuang,
and Christy Leppanen, 2019, “Logical Fallacies and Reasonable
Debates in Invasion Biology: A Response to Guiaşu and
Tindale”, 
Biology & Philosophy
, 34(5): article 49.
doi:10.1007/s10539-019-9704-0


Gaffney, Patrick M., 1975, “Roots of the Niche
Concept”, 
The American Naturalist
, 109(968):
490–490. doi:10.1086/283021


Gannett, Lisa, 2003, “Making Populations: Bounding Genes in
Space and in Time”, 
Philosophy of Science
, 70(5):
989–1001. doi:10.1086/377383


Garson, Justin, 2014, “What Is the Value of Historical
Fidelity in Restoration?”, 
Studies in History and Philosophy
of Science Part C: Studies in History and Philosophy of Biological and
Biomedical Sciences
, 45: 97–100.
doi:10.1016/j.shpsc.2013.10.003


Godfrey-Smith, Peter, 1994, “A Modern History Theory of
Functions”, 
Noûs
, 28(3): 344–362.
doi:10.2307/2216063


Griesemer, James R., 1992, “Niche: Historical
Perspectives”, in 
Keywords in Evolutionary Biology
,
Evelyn Fox Keller and Elisabeth Anne Lloyd (eds.), Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press, 231–240.


Grotkopp, Eva, Marcel Rejmánek, and Thomas L. Rost, 2002,
“Toward a Causal Explanation of Plant Invasiveness: Seedling
Growth and Life‐History Strategies of 29 Pine ( Pinus )
Species”, 
The American Naturalist
, 159(4):
396–419. doi:10.1086/338995


Grüne-Yanoff, Till, 2016, “Interdisciplinary Success
without Integration”, 
European Journal for Philosophy of
Science
, 6(3): 343–360. doi:10.1007/s13194-016-0139-z


Guala, Francesco, 2003, “Experimental Localism and External
Validity”, 
Philosophy of Science
, 70(5):
1195–1205. doi:10.1086/377400


Guiaşu, Radu Cornel and Christopher W. Tindale, 2023,
“Logical Fallacies Persist in Invasion Biology and Blaming the
Messengers Will Not Improve Accountability in This Field: A Response
to Frank et al.”, 
Biology & Philosophy
, 38(1):
article 3. doi:10.1007/s10539-023-09892-3


Gurevitch, Jessica and Dianna K. Padilla, 2004, “Are
Invasive Species a Major Cause of Extinctions?”, 
Trends in
Ecology & Evolution
, 19(9): 470–474.
doi:10.1016/j.tree.2004.07.005


Hairston, Nelson G., 1989, 
Ecological Experiments: Purpose,
Design, and Execution
, (Cambridge Studies in Ecology),
Cambridge/New York: Cambridge University Press.
doi:10.1017/CBO9780511608513


Hanski, Ilkka and Daniel Simberloff, 1997, “The
Metapopulation Approach, Its History, Conceptual Domain, and
Application to Conservation”, in 
Metapopulation Biology:
Ecology, Genetics, and Evolution
, Ilkka Hanski and Michael E.
Gilpin (eds), San Diego, CA: Academic Press, 5–26.
doi:10.1016/B978-012323445-2/50003-1


Hayes, Keith R. and Simon C. Barry, 2008, “Are There Any
Consistent Predictors of Invasion Success?”, 
Biological
Invasions
, 10(4): 483–506.
doi:10.1007/s10530-007-9146-5


Heymans, Johanna Jacomina, Marta Coll, Jason S. Link, Steven
Mackinson, Jeroen Steenbeek, Carl Walters, and Villy Christensen,
2016, “Best Practice in Ecopath with Ecosim Food-Web Models for
Ecosystem-Based Management”, 
Ecological Modelling
, 331:
173–184. doi:10.1016/j.ecolmodel.2015.12.007


Higgs, Eric, 2003, 
Nature by Design: People, Natural Process,
and Ecological Restoration
, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.


Hitchcock, Christopher and Elliott Sober, 2004, “Prediction
Versus Accommodation and the Risk of Overfitting”, 
The
British Journal for the Philosophy of Science
, 55(1): 1–34.
doi:10.1093/bjps/55.1.1


Hooper, David U., F. Stuart Chapin III, John J. Ewel, Andrew
Hector, Pablo Inchausti, Sandra Lavorel, John Hartley Lawton et al.,
2005, “Effects of biodiversity on ecosystem functioning: a
consensus of current knowledge”, 
Ecological monographs
,
75(1): 3–35. doi:10.1890/04-0922


Houlahan, Jeff E., Shawn T. McKinney, T. Michael Anderson, and
Brian J. McGill, 2017, “The priority of prediction in ecological
understanding”, 
Oikos
, 126(1): 1–7.
doi:10.1111/oik.03726


Hubbell, Stephen P., 2001, 
The Unified Neutral Theory of
Biodiversity and Biogeography
, (Monographs in Population Biology
32), Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.


Inkpen, S. Andrew, 2017, “Demarcating Nature, Defining
Ecology: Creating a Rationale for the Study of Nature’s
‘Primitive Conditions’”, 
Perspectives on
Science
, 25(3): 355–392. doi:10.1162/POSC_a_00246


Jax, Kurt, 2005, “Function and ‘Functioning’ in
Ecology: What Does It Mean?”, 
Oikos
, 111(3):
641–648. doi:10.1111/j.1600-0706.2005.13851.x


–––, 2006, “Ecological Units: Definitions
and Application”, 
The Quarterly Review of Biology
,
81(3): 237–258. doi:10.1086/506237


–––, 2010, 
Ecosystem Functioning
,
(Ecology, Biodiversity and Conservation), Cambridge/New York:
Cambridge University Press. doi:10.1017/CBO9780511781216


Jeschke, Jonathan, Lorena Gómez Aparicio, Sylvia Haider,
Tina Heger, Christopher Lortie, Petr Pyšek, and David Strayer,
2012, “Support for Major Hypotheses in Invasion Biology Is
Uneven and Declining”, 
NeoBiota
, 14: 1–20.
doi:10.3897/neobiota.14.3435


Johnson, Kristin, 2007, “Natural History as Stamp
Collecting: A Brief History”, 
Archives of Natural
History
, 34(2): 244–258. doi:10.3366/anh.2007.34.2.244


Justus, James, 2005, “Qualitative Scientific Modeling and
Loop Analysis”, 
Philosophy of Science
, 72(5):
1272–1286. doi:10.1086/508099


–––, 2012, “The Elusive Basis of
Inferential Robustness”, 
Philosophy of Science
, 79(5):
795–807. doi:10.1086/667902


–––, 2014, “Methodological Individualism
in Ecology”, 
Philosophy of Science
, 81(5):
770–784. doi:10.1086/677404


–––, 2019, “Ecological Theory and the
Superfluous Niche”, 
Philosophical Topics
, 47(1):
105–123. doi:10.5840/philtopics20194716


–––, 2021, 
The Philosophy of Ecology: An
Introduction
, Cambridge/New York: Cambridge University Press.
doi:10.1017/9781139626941


Justus, James and Samantha Wakil, 2021, “The Algorithmic
Turn in Conservation Biology: Characterizing Progress in
Ethically-Driven Sciences”, 
Studies in History and
Philosophy of Science
, 88: 181–192.
doi:10.1016/j.shpsa.2021.05.013


Kaiser, Marie I. and Rose Trappes, 2021, “Broadening the
Problem Agenda of Biological Individuality: Individual Differences,
Uniqueness and Temporality”, 
Biology & Philosophy
,
36(2): article 15. doi:10.1007/s10539-021-09791-5


Kareiva, P. and M. Andersen, 1988, “Spatial Aspects of
Species Interactions: The Wedding of Models and Experiments”, in

Community Ecology: A Workshop Held at Davis, CA, April 1986
,
Alan Hastings (ed.), (Lecture Notes in Biomathematics, 77),
Berlin/Heidelberg: Springer, 35–50.
doi:10.1007/978-3-642-85936-6_4


Kareiva, Peter, Ingrid M. Parker, and Miguel Pascual, 1996,
“Can We Use Experiments and Models in Predicting the
Invasiveness of Genetically Engineered Organisms?”,

Ecology
, 77(6): 1670–1675. doi:10.2307/2265771


Kennedy, Theodore A., Shahid Naeem, Katherine M. Howe, Johannes M.
H. Knops, David Tilman, and Peter Reich, 2002, “Biodiversity as
a Barrier to Ecological Invasion”, 
Nature
, 417(6889):
636–638. doi:10.1038/nature00776


Kincaid, Harold, John Dupré, and Alison Wylie (eds.), 2007,

Value-Free Science? Ideals and Illusions
, New York: Oxford
University Press. doi:10.1093/acprof:oso/9780195308969.001.0001


Kingsland, Sharon E., 1985 [1995], 
Modeling Nature: Episodes
in the History of Population Ecology
, (Science and Its Conceptual
Foundations), Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press. Second
edition, 1995.


–––, 2005, 
The Evolution of American
Ecology, 1890–2000
, Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University
Press.


Kitcher, Philip, 2001, 
Science, Truth, and Democracy

(Oxford Studies in the Philosophy of Science), New York: Oxford
University Press. doi:10.1093/0195145836.001.0001


Klein, Julie Thompson, 2010, “A Taxonomy of
Interdisciplinarity”, in 
The Oxford Handbook of
Interdisciplinarity
, first edition, Robert Frodeman (ed.),
(Oxford Handbooks), Oxford/New York: Oxford University Press,
15–30.


Knuuttila, Tarja and Andrea Loettgers, 2017, “Modelling as
Indirect Representation? The Lotka–Volterra Model
Revisited”, 
The British Journal for the Philosophy of
Science
, 68(4): 1007–1036. doi:10.1093/bjps/axv055


Laland, Kevin, Blake Matthews, and Marcus W. Feldman, 2016,
“An Introduction to Niche Construction Theory”,

Evolutionary Ecology
, 30(2): 191–202.
doi:10.1007/s10682-016-9821-z


Lawton, John H., 1999, “Are There General Laws in
Ecology?”, 
Oikos
, 84(2): 177–192.
doi:10.2307/3546712


Lean, Christopher Hunter, 2018, “Indexically Structured
Ecological Communities”, 
Philosophy of Science
, 85(3):
501–522. doi:10.1086/697746


–––, 2021, “Invasive Species and Natural
Function in Ecology”, 
Synthese
, 198(10):
9315–9333. doi:10.1007/s11229-020-02635-x


Levin, Simon A., 1998, “Ecosystems and the Biosphere as
Complex Adaptive Systems”, 
Ecosystems
, 1(5):
431–436. doi:10.1007/s100219900037


–––, 2002, “Complex Adaptive Systems:
Exploring the Known, the Unknown and the Unknowable”,

Bulletin of the American Mathematical Society
, 40(1):
3–19. doi:10.1090/S0273-0979-02-00965-5


–––, 2005, “Self-Organization and the
Emergence of Complexity in Ecological Systems”,

BioScience
, 55(12): 1075–1079.
doi:10.1641/0006-3568(2005)055[1075:SATEOC]2.0.CO;2


Levins, Richard, 1966, “The Strategy of Model Building in
Population Biology”, 
American Scientist
, 54(4):
421–431.


–––, 1993, “A Response to Orzack and
Sober: Formal Analysis and the Fluidity of Science”, 
The
Quarterly Review of Biology
, 68(4): 547–555.
doi:10.1086/418302


Levins, Richard, and Richard Lewontin, 1985, 
The Dialectical
Biologist
. Harvard University Press. 


Linquist, Stefan, 2008, “But Is It Progress? On the Alleged
Advances of Conservation Biology over Ecology”, 
Biology
& Philosophy
, 23(4): 529–544.
doi:10.1007/s10539-007-9082-x


–––, 2015, “Against Lawton’s
Contingency Thesis; or, Why the Reported Demise of Community Ecology
Is Greatly Exaggerated”, 
Philosophy of Science
, 82(5):
1104–1115. doi:10.1086/684024


–––, 2019, “Why Ecology and Evolution
Occupy Distinct Epistemic Niches”, 
Philosophical
Topics
, 47(1): 143–166.


Linquist, Stefan, T. Ryan Gregory, Tyler A. Elliott, Brent Saylor,
Stefan C. Kremer, and Karl Cottenie, 2016, “Yes! There Are
Resilient Generalizations (or ‘Laws’) in Ecology”,

The Quarterly Review of Biology
, 91(2): 119–131.
doi:10.1086/686809


Longino, Helen E., 1990, 
Science as Social Knowledge: Values
and Objectivity in Scientific Inquiry
, Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press.


Loreau, Michel, Shahid Naeem, Pablo Inchausti, Jan Bengtsson, J.
Philip Grime, Andrew Hector, D. U. Hooper et al., 2001,
“Biodiversity and ecosystem functioning: current knowledge and
future challenges”, 
Science
, 294(5543): 804–808.
doi:10.1126/science.1064088


Lubchenco, Jane and Leslie A. Read, 1991, “Manipulative
Experiments as Tests of Ecological Theory”, in 
Foundations
of Ecology: Classic Papers with Commentaries
, Leslie Real and
James H. Brown (eds.), Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
715–733.


Maclaurin, James and Kim Sterelny, 2008, 
What Is
Biodiversity?
, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.


MacLeod, Miles and Michiru Nagatsu, 2016, “Model Coupling in
Resource Economics: Conditions for Effective Interdisciplinary
Collaboration”, 
Philosophy of Science
, 83(3):
412–433. doi:10.1086/685745


Magnus, P. D., 2022, “The Scope of Inductive Risk”,

Metaphilosophy
, 53(1): 17–24.
doi:10.1111/meta.12536


Mäki, Uskali, 2016, “Philosophy of Interdisciplinarity.
What? Why? How?”, 
European Journal for Philosophy of
Science
, 6(3): 327–342. doi:10.1007/s13194-016-0162-0


Marquet, Pablo A., Andrew P. Allen, James H. Brown, Jennifer A.
Dunne, Brian J. Enquist, James F. Gillooly, Patricia A. Gowaty et al.,
2014, “On theory in ecology”, 
BioScience
, 64(8):
701–710. doi:10.1093/biosci/biu098


Matthewson, John, 2011, “Trade-Offs in Model-Building: A
More Target-Oriented Approach”, 
Studies in History and
Philosophy of Science Part A
, 42(2): 324–333.
doi:10.1016/j.shpsa.2010.11.040


May, Robert M., 1973, “Qualitative stability in model
ecosystems”, 
Ecology
, 54(3): 638–641.
doi:10.2307/1935352


McCann, Kevin Shear, 2000, “The Diversity–Stability
Debate”, 
Nature
, 405(6783): 228–233.
doi:10.1038/35012234


McIntosh, Robert P., 1987, “Pluralism in Ecology”,

Annual Review of Ecology and Systematics
, 18(1):
321–341. doi:10.1146/annurev.es.18.110187.001541


McMullin, Ernan, 1982, “Values in Science”, 
PSA:
Proceedings of the Biennial Meeting of the Philosophy of Science
Association
, 1982(2): 2–28.
doi:10.1086/psaprocbienmeetp.1982.2.192409


McShane, Katie, 2004, “Ecosystem Health”:,

Environmental Ethics
, 26(3): 227–245.
doi:10.5840/enviroethics200426314


Miller, John H. and Scott E. Page, 2007, 
Complex Adaptive
Systems: An Introduction to Computational Models of Social Life

(Princeton Studies in Complexity), Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
Press.


Millstein, Roberta L., 2009, “Populations as
Individuals”, 
Biological Theory
, 4(3): 267–273.
doi:10.1162/biot.2009.4.3.267


–––, 2010, “The Concepts of Population and
Metapopulation in Evolutionary Biology and Ecology”, in

Evolution Since Darwin: The First 150 Years
, M. A. Bell, D.
J. Futuyma, W. F. Eanes, and J. S. Levinton (eds), Sunderland, MA:
Sinauer, 61–86 (ch. 3).


–––, 2013, “Exploring the Status of
Population Genetics: The Role of Ecology”, 
Biological
Theory
, 7(4): 346–357. doi:10.1007/s13752-012-0056-0


–––, 2014, “How the Concept of Population
Resolves Concepts of Environment”, 
Philosophy of
Science
, 81(5): 741–755. doi:10.1086/677220


–––, 2018, “Is Aldo Leopold’s
‘Land Community’ an Individual?”, in

Individuation, Process, and Scientific Practices
,
Otávio Bueno, Ruey-Lin Chen, and Melinda Bonnie Fagan (eds),
New York: Oxford University Press, 279–302 (ch. 13).


–––, 2019, “Types of Experiments and
Causal Process Tracing: What Happened on the Kaibab Plateau in the
1920s”, 
Studies in History and Philosophy of Science Part
A
, 78: 98–104. doi:10.1016/j.shpsa.2019.04.001


–––, 2020, “Functions and functioning in
Aldo Leopold’s land ethic and in ecology”, 
Philosophy
of Science
, 87(5): 1107–1118.


Mitchell, Sandra D., 2000, “Dimensions of Scientific
Law”, 
Philosophy of Science
, 67(2): 242–265.
doi:10.1086/392774


–––, 2003, 
Biological Complexity and
Integrative Pluralism
 (Cambridge Studies in Philosophy and
Biology), Cambridge/New York: Cambridge University Press.
doi:10.1017/CBO9780511802683


–––, 2009, 
Unsimple Truths: Science,
Complexity, and Policy
, Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.


Moran, Nicholas P., Bob B. M. Wong, and Ross M. Thompson, 2017,
“Weaving Animal Temperament into Food Webs: Implications for
Biodiversity”, 
Oikos
, 126(7): 917–930.
doi:10.1111/oik.03642


Moreno, Álvaro and Matteo Mossio, 2015, 
Biological
Autonomy: A Philosophical and Theoretical Enquiry
 (History,
Philosophy and Theory of the Life Sciences 12), Dordrecht: Springer.
doi:10.1007/978-94-017-9837-2


Morrow, Katie H., 2023, “A Causal-Role Account of Ecological
Role Functions”, 
Philosophy of Science
, 90(2):
433–453. doi:10.1017/psa.2022.95


Mutwill, Alexandra M., Holger Schielzeth, Tobias D. Zimmermann, S.
Helene Richter, Sylvia Kaiser, and Norbert Sachser, 2021,
“Individuality Meets Plasticity: Endocrine Phenotypes across
Male Dominance Rank Acquisition in Guinea Pigs Living in a Complex
Social Environment”, 
Hormones and Behavior
, 131:
104967. doi:10.1016/j.yhbeh.2021.104967


Nagel, Rebecca, Sina Mews, Timo Adam, Claire Stainfield, Cameron
Fox-Clarke, Camille Toscani, Roland Langrock, Jaume Forcada, and
Joseph I. Hoffman, 2021, “Movement Patterns and Activity Levels
Are Shaped by the Neonatal Environment in Antarctic Fur Seal
Pups”, 
Scientific Reports
, 11(1): article 14323.
doi:10.1038/s41598-021-93253-1


Norton, Bryan G. and Douglas Noonan, 2007, “Ecology and
Valuation: Big Changes Needed”, 
Ecological Economics
,
63(4): 664–675. doi:10.1016/j.ecolecon.2007.02.013


Noss, Reed F., 1992, “Issues of Scale in Conservation
Biology”, in 
Conservation Biology: The Theory and Practice
of Nature Conservation Preservation and Management
, Peggy L.
Fiedler and Subodh K. Jain (eds), Boston, MA: Springer US,
239–250. doi:10.1007/978-1-4684-6426-9_9


Nunes-Neto, Nei, Alvaro Moreno, and Charbel N. El-Hani, 2014,
“Function in Ecology: An Organizational Approach”,

Biology & Philosophy
, 29(1): 123–141.
doi:10.1007/s10539-013-9398-7


Odenbaugh, Jay, 2001, “Ecological Stability, Model Building,
and Environmental Policy: A Reply to Some of the Pessimism”,

Philosophy of Science
, 68(S3): S493–S505.
doi:10.1086/392931


–––, 2003, “Complex Systems, Trade-Offs,
and Theoretical Population Biology: Richard Levin’s
‘Strategy of Model Building in Population Biology’
Revisited”, 
Philosophy of Science
, 70(5):
1496–1507. doi:10.1086/377425


–––, 2007, “Seeing the Forest and the
Trees: Realism about Communities and Ecosystems”, 
Philosophy
of Science
, 74(5): 628–641. doi:10.1086/525609


–––, 2010, “On the Very Idea of an
Ecosystem”, in 
New Waves in Metaphysics
, Allan Hazlett
(ed.), London: Palgrave Macmillan UK, 240–258.
doi:10.1057/9780230297425_13


–––, 2011, “Complex Ecological
Systems”, in 
Philosophy of Complex Systems
, Cliff
Hooker (ed.), (Handbook of the Philosophy of Science 10), Oxford:
North Holland, 421–439.
doi:10.1016/B978-0-444-52076-0.50015-8


–––, 2019a, “Functions in Ecosystem
Ecology: A Defense of the Systemic Capacity Account”,

Philosophical Topics
, 47(1): 167–180.
doi:10.5840/philtopics20194719


–––, 2019b, 
Ecological Models
,
(Cambridge Elements. Elements in the Philosophy of Biology),
Cambridge/New York: Cambridge University Press.
doi:10.1017/9781108685283


Odling-Smee, John, Douglas H. Erwin, Eric P. Palkovacs, Marcus W.
Feldman, and Kevin N. Laland, 2013, “Niche Construction Theory:
A Practical Guide for Ecologists”, 
The Quarterly Review of
Biology
, 88(1): 3–28. doi:10.1086/669266


Odum, Eugene P., 1953, 
Fundamentals of Ecology
,
Philadelphia, PA: W.B. Saunders. Second edition 1959.


–––, 1968, “Energy Flow in Ecosystems: A
Historical Review”, 
American Zoologist
, 8(1):
11–18. doi:10.1093/icb/8.1.11


O’Malley, Maureen A. and Orkun S. Soyer, 2012, “The
Roles of Integration in Molecular Systems Biology”, 
Studies
in History and Philosophy of Science Part C: Studies in History and
Philosophy of Biological and Biomedical Sciences
, 43(1):
58–68. doi:10.1016/j.shpsc.2011.10.006


O’Neill, Robert V., Donald Lee DeAngelis, J. B. Waide, and
Timothy F. H. Allen, 1986, 
A Hierarchical Concept of
Ecosystems
, (Monographs in Population Biology 23), Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press.


Orzack, Steven Hecht, 2005, “Discussion: What, If Anything,
Is ‘The Strategy of Model Building in Population Biology?’
A Comment on Levins (1966) and Odenbaugh (2003)”, 
Philosophy
of Science
, 72(3): 479–485. doi:10.1086/498475


Orzack, Steven Hecht and Elliott Sober, 1993, “A Critical
Assessment of Levins’s The Strategy of Model Building in
Population Biology (1966)”, 
The Quarterly Review of
Biology
, 68(4): 533–546. doi:10.1086/418301


Parrott, Lael, 2010, “Measuring ecological
complexity”, 
Ecological Indicators
, 10(6):
1069–1076.


Pâslaru, Viorel, 2018, “Mechanisms in Ecology”,
in 
The Routledge Handbook of Mechanisms and Mechanical
Philosophy
, Stuart Glennan and Phyllis Illari (eds), London/New
York: Routledge, 348–361 (ch. 26).


Peck, Steven L., 2004, “Simulation as Experiment: A
Philosophical Reassessment for Biological Modeling”, 
Trends
in Ecology & Evolution
, 19(10): 530–534.
doi:10.1016/j.tree.2004.07.019


Perretti, Charles T., Stephan B. Munch, and George Sugihara, 2013,
“Model-free forecasting outperforms the correct mechanistic
model for simulated and experimental data”, 
Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences
, 110(13): 5253–5257.


Peters, Robert Henry, 1991, 
A Critique for Ecology
,
Cambridge/New York: Cambridge University Press.


Pimm, Stuart L., 1991, 
The Balance of Nature? Ecological
Issues in the Conservation of Species and Communities
, Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.


Pocheville, Arnaud, 2015, “The Ecological Niche: History and
Recent Controversies”, in 
Handbook of Evolutionary Thinking
in the Sciences
, Thomas Heams, Philippe Huneman, Guillaume
Lecointre, and Marc Silberstein (eds), Dordrecht: Springer
Netherlands, 547–586. doi:10.1007/978-94-017-9014-7_26


Potochnik, Angela, 2021, “Our World Isn’t Organized
into Levels”, in Brooks et al. 2021: 61–76 (ch. 3).
doi:10.7551/mitpress/12389.003.0007


Pyšek, Petr, 1995, “On the Terminology Used in Plant
Invasion Studies”, in 
Plant Invasions: General Aspects and
Special Problems
, Petr Pyšek, Karel Prach, Marcel
Rejmanek, and Max Wade (eds), Amsterdam: SPB Academic,
71–81.


Raerinne, Jani, 2011, “Causal and Mechanistic Explanations
in Ecology”, 
Acta Biotheoretica
, 59(3–4):
251–271. doi:10.1007/s10441-010-9122-9


–––, 2013, “Stability and
Lawlikeness”, 
Biology & Philosophy
, 28(5):
833–851. doi:10.1007/s10539-013-9386-y


–––, 2015, “Evolutionary Contingency,
Stability, and Biological Laws”, 
Journal for General
Philosophy of Science
, 46(1): 45–62.
doi:10.1007/s10838-014-9271-7


Raffaelli, David G. and Christopher L. J. Frid, 2010, “The
Evolution of Ecosystem Ecology”, in 
Ecosystem Ecology: A New
Synthesis
, David G. Raffaelli and Christopher L. J. Frid (eds),
(Ecological Reviews), Cambridge/New York: Cambridge University Press,
1–18. doi:10.1017/CBO9780511750458.002


Railsback, Steven F. and Volker Grimm, 2011, 
Agent-Based and
Individual-Based Modeling: A Practical Introduction
, Princeton,
NJ: Princeton University Press.


Reed, Lowell J. and Raymond Pearl, 1927, “On the Summation
of Logistic Curves”, 
Journal of the Royal Statistical
Society
, 90(4): 729. doi:10.2307/2341367


Reichard, Sarah Hayden and Peter S. White, 2003, “Invasion
Biology: An Emerging Field of Study”, 
Annals of the Missouri
Botanical Garden
, 90(1): 64–66. doi:10.2307/3298526


Resetarits, William J. and Joseph Bernardo (eds), 1998,

Experimental Ecology: Issues and Perspectives
, New York:
Oxford University Press. doi:10.1093/oso/9780195102413.001.0001


Ricciardi, Anthony and Rachael Ryan, 2018, “The Exponential
Growth of Invasive Species Denialism”, 
Biological
Invasions
, 20(3): 549–553.
doi:10.1007/s10530-017-1561-7


Richardson, David M. and Anthony Ricciardi, 2013,
“Misleading Criticisms of Invasion Science: A Field
Guide”, 
Diversity and Distributions
, 19(12):
1461–1467. doi:10.1111/ddi.12150


Ricklefs, Robert E. and Gary L. Miller, 2000, 
Ecology
,
fourth edition, New York: W.H. Freeman.


Rockwood, Larry L., 2015, 
Introduction to Population
Ecology
, second edition, Chichester, West Sussex: Wiley
Blackwell.


Rolin, Kristina, 2016, “Values in the Social Sciences: The
Case of Feminist Research”, in 
Meta-Philosophical Reflection
on Feminist Philosophies of Science
, Maria Cristina Amoretti and
Nicla Vassallo (eds.), (Boston Studies in the Philosophy and History
of Science 317), Cham: Springer International Publishing,
133–150. doi:10.1007/978-3-319-26348-9_8


Roll-Hansen, Nils, 2017, “A Historical Perspective on the
Distinction Between Basic and Applied Science”, 
Journal for
General Philosophy of Science
, 48(4): 535–551.
doi:10.1007/s10838-017-9362-3


Roughgarden, J., 1972, “Evolution of Niche Width”,

The American Naturalist
, 106(952): 683–718.
doi:10.1086/282807


–––, 2009, “Is There a General Theory of
Community Ecology?”, 
Biology & Philosophy
, 24(4):
521–529. doi:10.1007/s10539-009-9164-z


Sagarin, Raphael and Aníbal Pauchard, 2010,
“Observational Approaches in Ecology Open New Ground in a
Changing World”, 
Frontiers in Ecology and the
Environment
, 8(7): 379–386. doi:10.1890/090001


Sagoff, Mark, 2018, “Invasive Species Denialism: A Reply to
Ricciardi and Ryan”, 
Biological Invasions
, 20(10):
2723–2729. doi:10.1007/s10530-018-1752-x


Santana, Carlos, 2014, “Save the Planet: Eliminate
Biodiversity”, 
Biology & Philosophy
, 29(6):
761–780. doi:10.1007/s10539-014-9426-2


–––, 2017, “Biodiversity
eliminativism” in 
The Routledge Handbook of Philosophy of
Biodiversity
, Justin Garson, Anya Plutynski, Sahotra Sarkar
(eds.), pp. 100–109, London: Routledge.


Sarkar, Sahotra, 2002, “Defining ‘Biodiversity’;
Assessing Biodiversity:”, 
Monist
, 85(1): 131–155.
doi:10.5840/monist20028515


–––, 2005, 
Biodiversity and environmental
philosophy: An introduction
. Cambridge University Press.


–––, 2011, “Habitat Reconstruction: Moving
Beyond Historical Fidelity”, in 
Philosophy of Ecology
,
Kevin deLaplante, Bryson Brown, and Kent A. Peacock (eds), (Handbook
of the Philosophy of Science 11), Kidlington, UK/Waltham, MA: North
Holland, 327–361. doi:10.1016/B978-0-444-51673-2.50013-3


–––, 2014a, “Environmental Philosophy:
From Theory to Practice”, 
Studies in History and Philosophy
of Science Part C: Studies in History and Philosophy of Biological and
Biomedical Sciences
, 45: 89–91.
doi:10.1016/j.shpsc.2013.10.010


–––, 2014b, “Environmental Philosophy:
Response to Critics”, 
Studies in History and Philosophy of
Science Part C: Studies in History and Philosophy of Biological and
Biomedical Sciences
, 45: 105–109.
doi:10.1016/j.shpsc.2013.10.011


Sarkar, Sahotra and Chris Margules, 2002, “Operationalizing
Biodiversity for Conservation Planning”, 
Journal of
Biosciences
, 27(4): 299–308. doi:10.1007/BF02704961


Sax, Dov F. and James H. Brown, 2000, “The Paradox of
Invasion”, 
Global Ecology and Biogeography
, 9(5):
363–371. doi:10.1046/j.1365-2699.2000.00217.x


Scheiner, Samuel M. and Michael R. Willig (eds), 2011, 
The
Theory of Ecology
, Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.


Schneider, David C., 2001, “The Rise of the Concept of Scale
in Ecology”, 
BioScience
, 51(7): 545–553.
doi:10.1641/0006-3568(2001)051[0545:TROTCO]2.0.CO;2


Schwarz, Jonas F. L., Sina Mews, Eugene J. DeRango, Roland
Langrock, Paolo Piedrahita, Diego Páez-Rosas, and Oliver
Krüger, 2021, “Individuality Counts: A New Comprehensive
Approach to Foraging Strategies of a Tropical Marine Predator”,

Oecologia
, 195(2): 313–325.
doi:10.1007/s00442-021-04850-w


Shrader-Frechette, Kristin S. and Earl D. McCoy, 1993,
“Ecological Concepts are Problematic”, in 
Method in
Ecology: Strategies for Conservation
, Cambridge/New York:
Cambridge University Press, 11–67.


Simberloff, Daniel, 2004, “Community Ecology: Is It Time to
Move On?: (An American Society of Naturalists Presidential
Address)”, 
The American Naturalist
, 163(6):
787–799. doi:10.1086/420777


–––, 2011, “The Rise of Modern Invasion
Biology and American Attitudes towards Introduced Species”, in

Invasive and Introduced Plants and Animals: Human Perceptions,
Attitudes and Approaches to Management
, Ian D. Rotherham, Robert
A. Lambert, and International Institute for Environment and
Development (eds), London/Washington, DC: Earthscan, 121–136
(ch. 8).


–––, 2014, “Biological Invasions:
What’s Worth Fighting and What Can Be Won?”,

Ecological Engineering
, 65: 112–121.
doi:10.1016/j.ecoleng.2013.08.004


Simon, Herbert A., 1962, “The Architecture of
Complexity”, 
Proceedings of the American Philosophical
Society
, 106(6): 467–482.


Singer, Michael C. and Camille Parmesan, 2018, “Lethal Trap
Created by Adaptive Evolutionary Response to an Exotic
Resource”, 
Nature
, 557(7704): 238–241.
doi:10.1038/s41586-018-0074-6


Sobek-Swant, Stephanie, Daniel A. Kluza, Kim Cuddington, and D.
Barry Lyons, 2012, “Potential Distribution of Emerald Ash Borer:
What Can We Learn from Ecological Niche Models Using Maxent and
GARP?”, 
Forest Ecology and Management
, 281:
23–31. doi:10.1016/j.foreco.2012.06.017


Stegenga, Jacob, 2010, “‘Population’ Is Not a
Natural Kind of Kinds”, 
Biological Theory
, 5(2):
154–160. doi:10.1162/BIOT_a_00029


Sterelny, Kim, 2006, “Local Ecological Communities”,

Philosophy of Science
, 73(2): 215–231.
doi:10.1086/510819


Thiengo, Silvana C., Fábio André Faraco, Norma C.
Salgado, Robert H. Cowie, and Monica A. Fernandez, 2007, “Rapid
Spread of an Invasive Snail in South America: The Giant African Snail,
Achatina fulica, in Brasil”, 
Biological Invasions
,
9(6): 693–702. doi:10.1007/s10530-006-9069-6


Thrush, Simon F., Judi E. Hewitt, Vonda J. Cummings, Malcolm O.
Green, Greig A. Funnell, and Michelle R. Wilkinson, 2000, “The
Generality of Field Experiments: Interactions between Local and
Broad-Scale Processes”, Ecology, 81(2): 399–415.
doi:10.1890/0012-9658(2000)081[0399:TGOFEI]2.0.CO;2


Townsend Peterson, A., Monica Papeş, and Muir Eaton, 2007,
“Transferability and Model Evaluation in Ecological Niche
Modeling: A Comparison of GARP and Maxent”, 
Ecography
,
30(4): 550–560. doi:10.1111/j.0906-7590.2007.05102.x


Trappes, Rose, 2022, “Individual Differences, Uniqueness,
and Individuality in Behavioural Ecology”, 
Studies in
History and Philosophy of Science
, 96: 18–26.
doi:10.1016/j.shpsa.2022.08.007


Trappes, Rose, Behzad Nematipour, Marie I Kaiser, Ulrich Krohs,
Koen J Van Benthem, Ulrich R Ernst, Jürgen Gadau, Peter Korsten,
Joachim Kurtz, Holger Schielzeth, Tim Schmoll, and Elina Takola, 2022,
“How Individualized Niches Arise: Defining Mechanisms of Niche
Construction, Niche Choice, and Niche Conformance”,

BioScience
, 72(6): 538–548.
doi:10.1093/biosci/biac023


Travis, Joseph, Felicia C. Coleman, Peter J. Auster, Philippe M.
Cury, James A. Estes, Jose Orensanz, Charles H. Peterson, Mary E.
Power, Robert S. Steneck, and J. Timothy Wootton., 2014,
“Integrating the invisible fabric of nature into fisheries
management”, 
Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences
, 111(2): 581–584.


Trombley, Carolyn A. and Karl Cottenie, 2019, “Quantifying
the Scientific Cost of Ambiguous Terminology in Community
Ecology”, 
Philosophical Topics
, 47(1): 203–218.
doi:10.5840/philtopics201947111


Turner, Monica Goigel and R. H. Gardner, 2015, 
Landscape
Ecology in Theory and Practice: Pattern and Process
, second
edition, New York: Springer. doi:10.1007/978-1-4939-2794-4


Valéry, Loïc, Hervé Fritz, and
Jean‐Claude Lefeuvre, 2013, “Another Call for the End of
Invasion Biology”, 
Oikos
, 122(8): 1143–1146.
doi:10.1111/j.1600-0706.2013.00445.x


Vellend, Mark, 2010, “Conceptual Synthesis in Community
Ecology”, 
The Quarterly Review of Biology
, 85(2):
183–206. doi:10.1086/652373


Weisberg, Michael, 2007a, “Forty Years of ‘The
Strategy’: Levins on Model Building and Idealization”,

Biology & Philosophy
, 21(5): 623–645.
doi:10.1007/s10539-006-9051-9


–––, 2007b, “Who Is a Modeler?”,

The British Journal for the Philosophy of Science
, 58(2):
207–233. doi:10.1093/bjps/axm011


Woods, Mark, 2017, 
Rethinking Wilderness
, Peterborough,
Ontario: Broadview Press.


Young, Ashley M. and Brendon M.H. Larson, 2011, “Clarifying
Debates in Invasion Biology: A Survey of Invasion Biologists”,

Environmental Research
, 111(7): 893–898.
doi:10.1016/j.envres.2011.06.006


Young, Andrew J., Anne A. Carlson, Steven L. Monfort, Andrew F.
Russell, Nigel C. Bennett, and Tim Clutton-Brock, 2006, “Stress
and the Suppression of Subordinate Reproduction in Cooperatively
Breeding Meerkats”, 
Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences
, 103(32): 12005–12010.
doi:10.1073/pnas.0510038103








Academic Tools










How to cite this entry
.








Preview the PDF version of this entry
 at the
 
Friends of the SEP Society
.








Look up topics and thinkers related to this entry

 at the Internet Philosophy Ontology Project (InPhO).








Enhanced bibliography for this entry

at 
PhilPapers
, with links to its database.












Other Internet Resources




Theoretical Ecology
,
 site maintained by Florian Hartig


Dynamic Ecology
,
 site maintained by Jeremy Fox


Sarkar, Sahotra, “Ecology”, 
Stanford Encyclopedia
of Philosophy
 (Winter 2023 Edition), Edward N. Zalta & Uri
Nodelman (eds.), URL =
 <
https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/win2023/entries/ecology/
>.
 [This was the previous entry on this topic in the 
Stanford
Encyclopedia of Philosophy
 – see the
 
version history
.]








Related Entries




biological individuals
 |
 
biology: experiment in
 |
 
conservation biology
 |
 
ecology: biodiversity
 |
 
emergent properties
 |
 
feminist philosophy, interventions: epistemology and philosophy of science
 |
 
inheritance systems
 |
 
levels of organization in biology
 |
 
mechanism in science
 |
 
natural selection: units and levels of
 |
 
reduction, scientific
 |
 
reduction, scientific: in biology
 |
 
scientific objectivity
 |
 
species
 |
 
supervenience








Acknowledgments



I would like to thank the PhiLiSci team at University of Bielefeld for
helpful comments and feedback on the entry, especially Katie Morrow,
for her extensive knowledge of the debate on functions in ecology.








 






Copyright © 2024
 by




Alkistis Elliott-Graves

<
a
.
elliott-graves
@
uni-bielefeld
.
de
>
    




 









  Open access to the SEP is made possible by a world-wide funding initiative.

  Please Read How You Can Help Support the Growth and Development of the Encyclopedia




 

