











 
 Entry Navigation 






Entry Contents


Bibliography


Academic Tools


Friends PDF Preview 


Author and Citation Info 
 


Back to Top 


























Feminist Political Philosophy
First published Sun Mar 1, 2009; substantive revision Fri Dec 15, 2023





This entry turns to how feminist philosophers have intervened in and,
to a great extent, transformed the intellectual field known as
political philosophy, which for millennia had largely ignored matters
of sex and gender. Traditional political philosophy largely sidelined
and excluded the private sphere and civil society from political
theorizing, the very realms in which women were largely sequestered.
It focused instead on matters of state and governance. The rise of
liberalism since the seventeenth century abetted this tendency by
drawing a sharp line between the public and the private realms. What
happened in the household, it held, were not matters of political
concern. Today, thanks largely to feminist interventions, political
philosophy is a far richer field of philosophical inquiry. It
understands power and governance much more broadly.



In its own right, feminist political philosophy is a branch of both
feminist philosophy and political philosophy. As a branch of feminist
philosophy, it serves as a form of critique or a hermeneutics of
suspicion (Ricœur 1970). That is, it serves as a way of opening
up or looking at the political world as it is usually understood and
uncovering ways in which women and their current and historical
concerns are poorly depicted, represented, and addressed. As a branch
of political philosophy, feminist political philosophy serves as a
field for developing new ideals, practices, and justifications for how
political institutions and practices should be organized and
reconstructed. Indeed, the feminist refrain that “the personal
is political” speaks to the fact that feminist political
philosophy is not only concerned with concepts that have always been
mainstays in political philosophy (e.g., justice, equality, freedom),
but with redefining and expanding what is considered
“political” in the first place (e.g., the family, the
workplace, reproduction; Hirschmann 2007). In this sense, feminist
political philosophy may be the paradigmatic branch of feminist
philosophy.



While feminist philosophy has been instrumental in critiquing and
reconstructing many branches of philosophy, from aesthetics to
philosophy of science, feminist political philosophy is also
paradigmatic because it best exemplifies the point of feminist theory,
which is, to borrow a phrase from Marx, not only to understand the
world but to change it (Marx 1845). And, though other fields have
effects that may change the world, feminist political philosophy
focuses most directly on understanding ways in which collective life
can be improved. This project involves understanding the ways in which
power emerges and is used or misused in public life (see the entry on
 
feminist perspectives on power
).
 As with other kinds of feminist theory, common themes have emerged
for discussion and critique, but there has been little in the way of
consensus among feminist theorists on what is the best way to
understand them. This introductory article lays out the areas of
concern that have occupied this vibrant field of philosophy for the
past forty years. It understands feminist philosophy broadly to
include work conducted by feminist theorists doing this philosophical
work from other disciplines, especially political science but also
anthropology, comparative literature, law, and other programs in the
humanities and social sciences.








1. Historical Context and Developments


2. Contemporary Approaches and Debates




2.1 Feminist Engagements with Liberalism and Neoliberalism


2.2 Radical Feminism


2.3 Socialist, Marxist, and Materialist Feminisms


2.4 Poststructuralist Feminisms


2.5 Care, Vulnerability, Affect


2.6 Intersectional Feminisms


2.7 Transnational, Decolonial, and Indigenous Feminisms


2.8 Feminist Democratic Theory






3. New Directions in Feminist Political Philosophy


Bibliography


Academic Tools


Other Internet Resources


Related Entries










1. Historical Context and Developments



Historically, political philosophy focused on the state and various
forms of governance. It largely ignored other realms as outside the
scope of the political. In general, political thought presumed that
political actors were necessarily male and that politics was a
masculine enterprise (Okin 1979). It sharply distinguished the public
realm of the state from the purportedly non-political realms of civil
society and the household, hence forgoing any serious scrutiny of
relations of domination in the private sphere. It presumed that women
were naturally inferior to men and lacked the capacity to rule
themselves. Hence traditional political thought deemed that it was
appropriate for them to be ruled by their fathers or husbands, all in
the sanctity of the home, immune from public scrutiny. These
presuppositions went largely unremarked upon until some women began to
demand the same “universal” human dignity that men were
proclaiming in newly republican and democratic states of the
eighteenth century (Gouges 1791). The first feminist
theorists—
avant la lettre
 of feminism—began
questioning the tenets of political thought not as an abstract
exercise but out of their very real, lived experience. As feminist
activists and theorists entered the fray, they quickly pointed out how
many of political theory’s presuppositions were thoroughly
gendered. Over millennia, feminists noted, political thought coded the
public realm as masculine and the private one as feminine; there was
the public world of men’s work and the private domain of
women’s labor. Political claims of universality were usually
quite particular: for men alone.



As they did this work, drawing on their own experience, feminist
political thinkers began creating new philosophical concepts. Early
feminist thinkers pointed out how social conditions (such as the lack
of education) diminished women’s capacities. Later, other
theorists pointed to the ways that women and their concerns were
excluded or sidelined. Already in the nineteenth century they were
noticing how people are socially constituted. By the mid-twentieth
century, again drawing from their experience and collective
“consciousness-raising” groups, they began challenging
norms that countenanced women being harassed on the street by catcalls
and whistles. They created new concepts like “sexual
harassment” and “objectification”. Over time
feminist political philosophers began to notice deeper metaphysical
presuppositions underlying gender divisions and to comment on how
philosophy had long construed such fundamental concepts as reason,
universality, and nature in thoroughly gendered and hence suspect
ways. In doing this work, feminist philosophers began to transform the
field of political philosophy itself, moving it from its narrow focus
on governance to a broader focus on philosophical questions of
identity, essence, equity, difference, justice, and the good life.



In the European and U.S. context, earlier generations of feminist
scholarship and activism, including the first wave of feminism in the
English-speaking world from the 1840s to the 1920s, focused on
improving the political, educational, and economic system primarily
for middle-class white women. Its greatest achievements were to
develop a language of equal rights for women and to garner women the
right to vote. Beginning in the 1960s, second wave feminists made
further interventions in political theory by drawing on the language
of the civil rights movements (e.g., the language of liberation) and
on a new feminist consciousness that emerged through women’s
solidarity movements and new forms of reflection that uncovered sexist
attitudes and impediments throughout the whole of society.



These advances opened up new questions, namely: is there anything that
unites women across cultures, time, and contexts? Just as Marxist
theory sought out a universal subject in the person of the worker,
feminists theorists sought out a commonality that united women across
cultures, someone for whom feminist theory could speak. No sooner had
that question been posed than it got taken down, as in the title of a
paper co-written by the Latina feminist philosopher María
Lugones and the white philosopher Elizabeth Spelman: “Have We
Got A Theory For You: Feminist Theory, Cultural Imperialism, and the
Demand for ‘The Woman’s Voice” (1986). This notion
of a universal womanhood was also interrupted by other thinkers, such
as bell hooks, saying that it excluded non-white and non-middle-class
women’s experience and concerns. Hooks’ 1981 book titled

Ain’t I a Woman?
 exposed mainstream feminism as a
movement of a small group of middle- and upper-class white women whose
experience was very particular, hardly universal. The work of Lugones,
Spelman, hooks and also Cherríe Moraga, Gloria Anzaldúa,
Audre Lorde, and others foregrounded the need to account for
women’s multiple and complex identities and experiences. By the
1990s the debates about whether there was a coherent concept of woman
that could underlie feminist politics was further challenged by
non-Western women challenging the Western women’s movement as
caught up in Eurocentric ideals that led to the colonization and
domination of “Third World” people. What is now known as
postcolonial and decolonial theories further heighten the debate
between feminists who wanted to identify a universal feminist subject
of woman (e.g., Okin, Nussbaum, and Ackerly) and those who call for
recognizing multiplicity, diversity, and intersectionality (e.g.,
Spivak, Narayan, Mahmood, and Jaggar).



As a branch of political philosophy, feminist political philosophy has
often mirrored the various divisions at work in political philosophy
more broadly. Prior to the fall of the Berlin Wall and the end of the
Cold War, political philosophy was usually divided into categories
such as liberal, conservative, socialist, and Marxist. Except for
conservatism, for each category there were often feminists working and
critiquing alongside it. Hence, as Alison Jaggar’s classic text,

Feminist Politics and Human Nature
, spelled out, each
ideological approach drew feminist scholars who would both take their
cue from and borrow the language of a particular ideology (Jaggar
1983). Jaggar’s text grouped feminist political philosophy into
four camps: liberal feminism, socialist feminism, Marxist feminism,
and radical feminism. The first three groups followed the lines of
Cold War global political divisions: American liberalism, European
socialism, and a revolutionary communism (though few in the west would
embrace Soviet-style communism). Radical feminism was the most rooted
in specifically feminist approaches and activism, developing its own
political vocabulary with its roots in the deep criticisms of
patriarchy that feminist consciousness had produced in its first and
second waves. Otherwise, feminist political philosophy largely
followed the lines of traditional political philosophy. But this has
never been an uncritical following. As a field bent on changing the
world, even liberal feminist theorists tended to criticize liberalism
as much or more than they embraced it, and to embrace socialism and
other more radical points of view more than to reject them. Still, on
the whole, these theorists generally operated within the language and
framework of their chosen approach to political philosophy.



Political philosophy began to change enormously in the late 1980s,
just before the end of the Cold War, with a new invocation of an old
Hegelian category: civil society, an arena of political life
intermediate between the state and the household. This was the arena
of associations, churches, labor unions, book clubs, choral societies
and manifold other nongovernmental yet still public organizations. In
the 1980s political theorists began to turn their focus from the state
to this intermediate realm, which suddenly took center stage in
Eastern Europe in organizations that challenged the power of the state
and ultimately led to the downfall of communist regimes. It also
opened up more avenues, beyond the state, for feminist political
theorizing.



After the end of the Cold War, political philosophy along with
political life radically realigned. New attention focused on civil
society and the public sphere, especially with the timely translation
of Jürgen Habermas’s early work, the 
Structural
Transformation of the Public Sphere
 (Habermas 1962 [1989]).
Volumes soon appeared on civil society and the public sphere, focusing
on the ways that people organized themselves and developed public
power rather than on the ways that the state garnered and exerted its
power. In fact, there arose a sense that the public sphere ultimately
might exert more power than the state, at least in the fundamental way
in which public will is formed and serves to legitimate—or
not—state power. In the latter respect, John Rawls’s work
was influential by developing a theory of justice that tied the
legitimacy of institutions to the normative judgments that a
reflective and deliberative people might make (Rawls 1971). By the
early 1990s, Marxists seemed to have disappeared or at least become
very circumspect (though the downfall of communist regimes
needn’t have had any effect on Marxist analysis proper, which
never subscribed to Leninist or Maoist thought). Socialists also
retreated or transformed themselves into “radical
democrats” (Mouffe [ed.] 1992a, 1993, 2000).



Now the old schema of liberal, radical, socialist, and Marxist
feminisms were much less relevant. There were fewer debates about what
kind of state organization and economic structure would be better for
women and more debates about the value of the private sphere of the
household and the nongovernmental space of associations. Along with
political philosophy more broadly, more feminist political
philosophers began to turn to the meaning and interpretation of civil
society, the public sphere, and democracy itself. At this point in the
early 1990s new work in political theory turning to civil society
converged with feminist political theory that was rendering
“political” realms that heretofore had been excluded from
mainstream political theory. A synergy arose between those studying
communitarianisms and feminists working in an ethics-of-care
tradition: both pointed to how particular care relations and communal
ties were as or more important than abstract principles of justice.
They also began to question the binary and hierarchical divisions of
justice over care, universality over particularity, and the right over
the good, all metaphysical suppositions that were hardly neutral.


2. Contemporary Approaches and Debates



Political philosophy today is significantly more interesting, complex,
and capacious thanks to feminist interventions in the field. While the
previous section traces these interventions in broad terms, showing
how political philosophy has been transformed as a result, this
section will provide more detailed descriptions of some of the major
sites of concern, debate, and critique animating feminist political
philosophy. Because feminist political philosophy is often
distinguished by its attention to the concrete realities shaping the
lives of women, differences among women (cultural, social, economic,
experiential) drive the rich diversity of work being done in this
field, and 
difference
 itself is a major topic for theorizing
with respect to foundational concepts like justice, freedom, and
equality. Thus, it is important to emphasize that there is no

one
 feminist perspective shaping work in feminist political
philosophy, but a rich variety of perspectives emerging from
particular contexts, histories, and traditions. They are sometimes in
tension with each other.



Now in the second decade of the twenty-first century, feminist
theorists are doing an extraordinary variety of work on matters
political and democratic that confront new and/or pressing challenges.
Similar developments in the areas of global ethics, public policy,
human rights, disabilities studies, bioethics, climate change, and
international development blur the distinction between theory and
practice in philosophically generative ways.



For example, in global ethics there is a debate over whether there are
universal values of justice and freedom that should be intentionally
cultivated for women in the developing world or whether cultural
diversity should be prioritized. Feminist theorists have sought to
answer this question in a number of different and compelling ways.
(For some examples see Ackerly 2000; Ackerly & Okin 1999; Benhabib
2002 and 2006; Butler 2000; Gould 2004; Khader 2019; Abu-Lughod 2013;
Nussbaum 1999a; and Zerilli 2009; see also the entry on
 
feminist perspectives on globalization
.)





Modern abolitionist feminism is driven by the contributions of Black
feminist philosophers like Angela Davis (2003, 2005, 2016, and in
Davis, Dent, Meiners, & Richie 2022), whose work on the racialized
prison industrial complex has helped spur the social-political
movement to abolish prisons and develop new theories of restorative
justice. Contemporary feminist theories of abolitionism have also
built on
 
Michel Foucault
’s
 critique of the prison, generating new work on political resistance
to social structures of incarceration, as well as new ways of
exploring foundational political concepts like privacy, freedom, and
justice (Pitts 2021b; Zurn & Dilts [ed.] 2016; Zurn 2021). (See
also Ruth Wilson Gilmore 2007 and 2022; Davis, Dent, Meiners, &
Richie 2022; Guenther 2013; Montford & Taylor [eds] 2022.)



The work of feminist legal theorists (see the entry on
 
feminist philosophy of law
)
 has been transformative on both the theory and policy fronts. In her
1989 article “Demarginalizing the Intersection of Race and
Sex” Kimberlé Crenshaw critiqued
“single-axis” legal frameworks for failing to address
race- and gender-based discrimination occurring at the intersection of
multiple identities (Crenshaw 1989). Instead, she promoted an

intersectional
 framework and, along with many others,
developed a theory of 
intersectionality
 as an analytic
framework for understanding how compounded and intermeshed systems of
privilege and oppression structure experience (see also
 
section 2.6

 below). Along with Crenshaw, Anita Allen (2011), Martha Fineman (2008
[2011]), Catherine MacKinnon (1987, 1989), Mari J. Matsuda (1986,
1996), and Patricia J. Williams (1991) are prominent legal scholars
whose work has made significant contributions to debates in feminist
political philosophy.



Feminists contributions in
 
ethics and moral psychology

 that emphasize relations of care have also had a major impact on
political philosophy. This intervention has challenged masculinist
characterizations of political subjects as highly independent and
rational, as well as core concepts within political philosophy (e.g.,
justice, freedom, rights, sovereignty, and autonomy) derived from that
characterization (see also
 
section 2.5

 below).



Likewise, new philosophical work on disabilities, as the entry on
 
feminist perspectives on disability

 explains, is informed by a great deal of feminist theory, from
standpoint philosophy to feminist phenomenology and feminist care
ethics, as well as political philosophical questions of identity,
difference, and diversity (see also Kittay & Carlson [ed.] 2010).
Feminist political philosophers like Martha Nussbaum (2006) have drawn
on the insights of philosophers of disability to offer new conceptions
of justice (i.e., the capabilities approach).



Ultimately, the number of approaches that can be taken on any of these
issues are as many as the number of philosophers there are working on
them. The remainder of this entry will outline a variety of approaches
to central concerns in feminist political philosophy, noting general
family resemblances among these approaches (i.e., liberal feminist,
radical feminist, Marxist feminist, socialist feminist) and
highlighting new constellations that have emerged (e.g.,
intersectional feminisms).


2.1 Feminist Engagements with Liberalism and Neoliberalism




Liberal feminism

 remains a strong current in feminist political thought. Following
liberalism’s focus on freedom and equality, liberal
feminism’s primary concern is to protect and enhance
women’s personal and political autonomy, the first being the
freedom to live one’s life as one chooses and the second being
the freedom to help decide the direction of the political community.
This follows from Enlightenment liberalism’s core norm of equal
respect for personhood, where personhood is tied to moral equality, or
the equal worth of persons as moral choosers (Nussbaum 1999a). This
approach was invigorated with the publication of John Rawls’s

A Theory of Justice
 (1971) and subsequently his 
Political
Liberalism
 (1993). Susan Moller Okin (1989, 1979, 1999), Eva
Kittay (1999), Martha Nussbaum (2006), and Amy Baehr (2017) have used
Rawls’s work productively to extend his theory to attend to
women’s concerns.



Perhaps more than any other approach, liberal feminist theory
parallels developments in liberal feminist activism. While feminist
activists have waged legal and political battles to criminalize, as
just one example, violence against women (which previously, in marital
relations, hadn’t been considered a crime), feminist political
philosophers who have engaged the liberal lexicon have shown how the
distinction between private and public realms has served to uphold
male domination of women by rendering power relations within the
household as “natural” and immune from political
regulation. Such political philosophy uncovers how seemingly innocuous
and “commonsensical” categories have covert power agendas.
For instance, Clare Chambers has critiqued the institution of
marriage, arguing that it violates liberal political principles of
equality and liberty (Chambers 2017a). Feminist critiques of the
public/private split supported legal advances that finally led in the
1980s to the criminalization in the United States of spousal rape
(Sigler & Haygood 1988). Efforts to politicize the private sphere
have also challenged the capitalist economic system that relies on
women’s unpaid labor. As the entry on
 
feminist perspectives on class and work

 explains, scholars like Silvia Federici have argued that
women’s unpaid housework and reproductive labor is essential to
the social reproduction of capitalism that exploits women. The
“wages for housework” movement led by scholar-activists
like Federici is an attempt to demand remuneration for women’s
unpaid work (Federici 2012, 2021; more on this Marxist feminist
lineage in
 
section 2.3
).
 Reproductive justice, pornography, and sex work are yet more issues
of convergence for feminist proponents and critics of liberalism alike
(see the section on Reproductive Rights in the entry on
 
feminist philosophy of law
;
 Altman & Watson 2019; Watson & Flanigan 2020). While the U.S.
legal tradition has typically grounded abortion rights in the right to
privacy, feminist political philosophers such as Shatema Threadcraft
(2016) have understood reproductive justice as more fundamentally
having to do with the freedom to choose one’s destiny. As such,
it is connected to the history of other struggles for race and gender
equality in earlier eras.



Carole Pateman and Charles Mills have worked within the liberal
tradition to show the limits and faults of social contract theory, and
Enlightenment liberalism more broadly, for women and people of color.
Their jointly authored book, 
Contract & Domination
,
levels a devastating critique against systems of sexual and racial
domination. This work engages and critiques some of the most dominant
strains of political philosophy. Martha Nussbaum has defended
liberalism from some of its critics, arguing that the most appealing
versions of liberalism successfully avoid feminist criticisms that
liberalism is overly individualistic, abstract, and rationalist
(Nussbaum 1999a). She does however take seriously two deep and
unresolved problems within liberalism “exposed by feminist
thinkers”: (1) the fact of dependency and the need for care and
(2) gender inequality and the family (Nussbaum 2004). With respect to
dependency—the reality of human dependency and thus the need for
care throughout the course of life—Asha Bhandary (2020) has
developed a Rawlsian social contract framework to expose and address
systemic inequalities in who receives and provides care (see also
Bhandary & Baehr [eds] 2021 and
 
section 2.5

 below). With respect to the second issue, which deals with the social
institution of the family as a site of gender hierarchy and
oppression, Marxist, socialist, and materialist feminists have
analyzed the material conditions under which these social arrangements
(the family and gender hierarchy) have developed. These feminists
typically critique liberalism for entrenching social arrangements
(such as the public/private split and the system of wage labor) that
arise with capitalism and marginalize and disempower women as a social
group (see
 
section 2.3

 below).



As other feminist critics have argued, many of the central categories
of liberalism occlude women’s lived concerns. For example, the
right to privacy coveted by classical liberals is a major source of
contention for feminists: the private realm, understood as a domain
free from state intervention, has historically been the domain where
women and children have experienced the bulk of everyday forms of
oppression. The liberal private/public distinction sequesters the
private sphere, and any harm that may occur there to women, away from
political scrutiny (Pateman 1988). Other feminist critics note that
liberalism continues to treat as unproblematic concepts that theorists
in the 1990s and since have problematized, such as “woman”
as a stable and identifiable category and the univocity of the self
underlying self-rule or autonomy. Decolonial feminists like
María Lugones have exposed the Eurocentric foundations of this
view of the self (Lugones 2003; see also
 
section 2.7
).
 While Mari Matsuda develops a feminist critique of the methodological
abstraction in liberal theories such as Rawls’ 
A Theory of
Justice
 (Matsuda 1986), others (such as Zerilli 2009) have argued
that the universal values that liberal 
feminists
 such as Okin
invoked were really expanded particulars, with liberal theorists
mistaking their ethnocentrically derived values as universal ones. In
this vein, Falguni Sheth, focusing on the treatment of Muslim women in
the contemporary United States, argues that despite liberal claims to
secular neutrality, liberal states actively exclude and discriminate
against racialized and marginalized populations (Sheth 2022).



Beyond liberal feminism, contemporary feminist philosophers have led
the way in theorizing and critiquing what is known as neoliberalism,
especially the ways that neoliberal social and economic forces impact
the lives of women. On Wendy Brown’s account (2015),
neoliberalism refers to a set of relations between state, society, and
subjects that mimics and reinforces radical free-market ideals in the
economy. These forces, Brown argues, undermine liberal democratic
citizenship, public institutions, and popular sovereignty. Nancy
Fraser (2013), Jodi Dean (2009), Bonnie Honig (2017) and Judith Butler
(2015) join Brown in asking whether democracy—or “the
demos”—can be sustained under neoliberal conditions of
rapidly increasing economic precariousness and diminishing social and
political resources for resistance. Meanwhile, Elizabeth Anderson asks
how putatively positive values like “work ethic” have
become central to the moral and physical exploitation of workers under
neoliberalism.


2.2 Radical Feminism



While feminist liberalism continues to flourish, the historical
developments and emerging debates described in the previous sections
have eclipsed or deeply transformed Jaggar’s other three
categories of radical, Marxist, and socialist feminism (Jaggar 1983).
The “grand narratives” that underlay the latter two have
become less credible (Snyder 2008). Among theorists, radical feminism
has always been somewhat of a niche approach, likely because its
stance is rather exacting. As the name “radical” suggests,
radical feminists share the belief that existing structures and
institutions need to be overhauled—rather than

reformed
, as liberalism would have it—in order to get
at the “root” of women’s oppression.



Those who work in radical feminism continue to take issue with many of
the central tenets of liberal feminism, especially its focus on the
individual and the supposedly free choices that individuals can make.
Where the liberal sees the potential for freedom, the radical feminist
sees structures of domination that are bigger than any individual. The
idea that domination and oppression affect social groups in ways that
are 
structural
 and 
systemic
, though they may be
experienced differently by members of different social groups, is a
major contribution of feminist political philosophy (Frye 1983; Young
1990). Radical feminists remain committed to getting at the root of
male domination by understanding the source of power differentials,
which some radical feminists, including Catharine MacKinnon, trace
back to sexuality and the notion that heterosexual intercourse enacts
male domination over women.





Women and men are divided by gender, made into the sexes as we know
them, by the requirements of its dominant form, heterosexuality, which
institutionalizes male sexual dominance and female sexual submission.
If this is true, sexuality is the linchpin of gender inequality.
(MacKinnon 1989: 113)





Patriarchy itself, according to this view, dominates women by
positioning them as objects of men’s desire (Welch 2015).
Radical feminists of the 1980s tended to see power as running one-way,
from those with power over those who are being oppressed. As Amy Allen
puts it,





Unlike liberal feminists, who view power as a positive social resource
that ought to be fairly distributed, and feminist phenomenologists,
who understand domination in terms of a tension between transcendence
and immanence, radical feminists tend to understand power in terms of
dyadic relations of dominance/subordination, often understood on
analogy with the relationship between master and slave. (2005:
§3.2)





Radical feminists of the 1970s and 1980s sought to reject the
prevailing order in various ways, sometimes advocating separatism
(Daly 1973 [1985], 1978 [1990]), the technologization of procreation
(and thus freeing women from their oppressive role in biological
reproduction; Firestone 1970), or, as MacKinnon would have it,
rejecting normative sexuality as rooted in male domination (MacKinnon
1989). As Nancy Hirschmann notes, many radical feminists take biology
as a “fundamental starting point” for theorizing
(Hirschmann 2007: 146). This approach is generally recognized to be
retrograde.



A new generation of radical feminist theorists are renewing the
tradition, showing how it has respected concerns such as
intersectionality (Whisnant 2016) and shares some of the commitments
of the postmodern feminists discussed below, e.g., skepticism about
any fixed gender identity or gender binaries and a more fluid and
performative approach to sexuality and politics (Snyder 2008), as well
as the ways that power and privilege continue to hold women back
(Chambers 2017b: 656).


2.3 Socialist, Marxist, and Materialist Feminisms



Throughout the twentieth century, many political theorists in Europe,
the United States, and Latin America drew on socialist and Marxist
texts to develop theories of social change attentive to issues of
class relations and exploitation in modern capitalist economies. By
and large, Marxist feminists focus on how modes of production, along
with changing relations of production and reproduction shape the
social arrangements (e.g., the gender division of labor, gender
hierarchy) and institutions (e.g., marriage, motherhood, the family)
that contribute to women’s oppression. After learning of the
horrors of Stalinism, most Western Marxists and socialists, feminists
included, were extremely critical of the communist systems in the
Soviet Union and later in China. Western, mostly anti-communist,
Marxist thought flourished in Italy (with Antonio Gramsci’s
work), England (with Stuart Hall and Raymond Williams’ work),
France (with the 
Socialisme ou Barbarie
 group), and the
United States (less so there after McCarthyism, yet renewed somewhat
in the 1960s with the New Left). Jaggar’s 1983 book summed up
well the way feminists were using socialist and Marxist ideas to
understand the way women were exploited and their laboring and
reproductive work devalued and unpaid though necessary for capitalism
to function. Drawing on Frederick Engels’ emphasis on the
“reproduction of immediate life”, Marxist and socialist
feminists were able to move beyond more orthodox readings of Marx that
restrict focus to modes of “production” that privilege the
experience of men as wage-laborers (Engels 1884: Preface). 
Social
reproduction theorists
 instead analyze forms of labor, most often
women’s unpaid labor, that contribute to the maintenance of life
at the individual, family, and species level (see Bhattacharya [ed.]
2017; Federici 2004 and 2021; S. Ferguson 2019). In the entry on
 
feminist perspectives on class and work
,
 the authors point to much of the work that was going on in this field
up through the mid-1990s. Since then, the authors note, various
postmodern, postcolonial, poststructuralist, and deconstructive
theories have criticized the bases for socialist and Marxist thought,
including the “grand narrative” of economic determinism
and the reduction of everything to economic and material relations.
Despite this, Marxist analyses remain important to a variety of work
being done in contemporary feminist political philosophy (see Dean
2009; Delphy 1984; Federici 2004; Fraser 2009, 2022; Gago 2019 [2020];
Spivak 1987; Vogel 1983).



While the lineage and trajectory of materialist feminism (as distinct
from Marxist or socialist feminism) is unclear (see Gimenez 2000),
Marxist, Socialist, and materialist feminisms all share an attention
to the concrete material conditions underlying existing social
arrangements (e.g., of gender hierarchy), the historically specific
nature of these conditions, and a commitment to feminism as an
emancipatory movement, not merely a scholarly endeavor. Meanwhile,
feminists associated with these schools of thought tend to diverge
when it comes to which topics of analysis are taken up, which aspects
of Marx’s theory are considered pertinent for explaining
women’s oppression, and the relationship between feminism and
(anti)capitalism (Gimenez 2000). While the categories of socialist and
Marxist feminisms are less relevant today, materialist feminism is
experiencing something of a renaissance. While
“materialist” can mean many things, as in the broader
focus on matter and the body animating the work of “New
Materialism” (e.g., see Coole & Frost [ed.] 2010), for the
purposes of this entry, “materialist feminism” has a
deeper and more explicit connection to the Marxist usage of the term
“materialism” as described by Engels (and referenced
above):





According to the materialist conception, the decisive element of
history is pre-eminently the production and reproduction of life and
its material requirements. This implies, on the one hand, the
production of the means of existence (food, clothing, shelter and the
necessary tools); on the other hand, the generation of children, the
propogation of the species. (Engels 1884 [trans. Untermann 1902],
Preface).





In Martha Gimenez’s view, the fact that materialist feminism has
somewhat displaced Marxist and socialist feminisms may have more to do
with the “ideological balance of power” in politics,
academia, and publishing than the strength of feminist critiques of
Marxism for its alleged economism and class reductionism (Gimenez
2000: 25).



Since the 1990s, the feminist concern with culture, identity, and
difference—issues that were previously marginalized within
mainstream white Anglo-American and French feminist theory and
activism—increased, somewhat displacing Marxist and socialist
feminism’s focus on systemic social forces and concrete material
conditions. Certainly, new generations of materialist feminists and
critical theorists tend to be more friendly to postmodern theories of
meaning, identity, and subjectivity important in the field (see, for
example, Fraser 2009; Fraser & Jaeggi 2018; Amy Allen 2008; McAfee
2008; and Young 2000) and classic works by philosophers like Angela
Davis (
Women, Race, and Class
, 1981) demonstrate that
concerns about identity, culture, and difference are not incompatible
with Marxist feminist analysis.


2.4 Poststructuralist Feminisms



Like Marxist/materialist feminists who take seriously the role that
sexual difference plays in systems of production and reproduction,
poststructuralist feminists also take sexual difference seriously,
attending to the ways in which language and meaning-systems structure
experience. Notable among them are the so-called French Feminists,
namely Cixous, Kristeva, and Irigaray. Of them all, Irigaray may have
the most developed political philosophy, including several books on
the rights that should be afforded to girls and women.
Irigaray’s early work (1974 [1985a] and 1977 [1985b]) made the
case that in the history of philosophy women have been denied their
own essence or identity. Rather, they have been positioned as
men’s mirror negation. So that to be a man is to not be a woman,
and hence that woman equals only not-man. Her strategy in response to
this is to speak back from the margins to which women have been
relegated and to claim some kind of “essence” for women,
and, along with that, a set of rights that are specifically for girls
and women (Irigaray 1989 [1994] and 1992 [1996]). Criticisms of her
views have been heated, including among feminists themselves,
especially those who are wary of any kind of essentialist and
biological conflation of women’s identity. To the extent that
Irigaray is an essentialist, her view would be relegated to what is
sometimes called symbolic difference feminism (Dietz 2003). However,
there are also compelling arguments that Irigaray is wielding
essentialism strategically or metaphorically, that she isn’t
claiming that women really do have some kind of irreducible essence
that the history of metaphysics has denied them (Fuss 1989). This
other reading would put Irigaray more in the performative group
described below
 (
section 2.8
).
 The same kind of argument could be made for the work of Julia
Kristeva—that her metaphors of the female chora, for example,
are describing the Western imaginary, not any kind of womanly reality.
So whether French feminist thought should be grouped as difference
feminism or performative feminism is still very much open to
debate.



To the extent that the above two types of feminist theory are
pinpointing some kind of specific difference between the sexes, they
raise concerns about essentialism or identifying distinct values that
women have as women. Such concerns are part of a larger set of
criticisms that have run through feminist theorizing since the 1970s,
with non-white, non-middle-class, and non-western women questioning
the very category of “woman” and the notion that this
title could be a boundary-spanning category that could unite women of
various walks of life. (See the entries on
 
identity politics

 and
 
feminist perspectives on sex and gender
.)
 Criticisms of a unitary identity of “woman” have been
motivated by worries that much feminist theory has originated from the
standpoint of a particular class of women who mistake their own
particular standpoint for a universal one. In her 1981 book,

Ain’t I a Woman?: Black women and feminism
, bell hooks
notes that the feminist movement pretends to speak for all women but
was made up of primarily white, middle class women who, because of
their narrow perspective, did not represent the needs of poor women
and women of color and ended up reinforcing class stereotypes (hooks
1981). What is so damning about this kind of critique is that it
mirrors the one that feminists have leveled against mainstream
political theorists who have taken the particular category of men to
be a universal category of mankind, a schema that does not in fact
include women under the category of mankind but marks them as other
(Lloyd 1984 [1993]).



The question of subjectivity has been a particularly fertile one for
feminist political philosophy. Feminist politics and activism,
informed by poststructuralist and postcolonial critiques of the
subject, have spurred new work that seeks to understand what remains
of the “feminist subject” after critiques of essentialism
and Eurocentrism (Butler 1995; Kramer 2017; Weeks 1998; Zerilli
2005).


2.5 Care, Vulnerability, Affect



Many of the recent developments in feminist political philosophy have
followed on the heels of feminist critiques or reinterpretations of
the Western philosophical canon. Earlier works by Wendy Brown (1988),
Alison Jaggar (1989), Genevieve Lloyd (1984 [1993]), Susan Moller Okin
(1979, 1989), Carole Pateman (1988, 1989), and others, revealed the
masculinist foundations of mainstream political theory. As Okin put
it,





[It] has proved to be no simple matter to integrate women into a
tradition of theorizing created by, for, and about men. (Okin 1998:
118)





As she goes on to say,





Great value has been placed on things traditionally associated with
men—on the allegedly transcendent nonphysical realm, on
excessive individualism, on reason as all-important, and on the
so-called manly virtues—including competitiveness and
aggression. At the same time, the realm of things traditionally
associated with women—concern with physical needs and
nurturance, emotionality, cooperation (with other people and with
nature)—have been much more inclined to be denigrated. (Okin
1998: 119)





Rather than attempting to align their theories with those values of
individualism, rationality, and abstraction associated with
masculinity (and classical liberalism), many feminist thinkers have
instead sought to revalue traditionally denigrated values associated
with femininity.



A prime example is care ethics (see the discussion in the entry on
 
feminist ethics
).
 Drawing on Carol Gilligan’s pathbreaking research in moral
psychology (Gilligan 1982), which showed that the dominant conception
of moral development and subjectivity was really a reflection of a
particular, masculine style of moral reasoning, feminist political
theorists challenged dominant conceptions of 
political

subjectivity, judgment, and action. Just as Gilligan and other
feminist ethicists emphasized that styles of moral reasoning
associated with women were not inferior because of their
distinctiveness from masculinist models—and that distinctiveness
includes an emphasis on emotions like empathy and care, responsiveness
to need, and an awareness of one’s connection with others and
the natural world—feminist political philosophers argued that
ways of looking at and organizing the world informed by care are not
inferior or pathological. This spurred new approaches to theorizing
foundational political concepts that are at odds with liberal
political theory in particular. First and foremost, political
theorists influenced by the care ethics tradition insist that
political subjects are not independent, but fundamentally

(inter)dependent
, enmeshed in complex networks of relation
necessary for survival. This means that as political agents, we do not
act on our own, but rely on others who are themselves dependent. This
transformed view of the self has both theoretical and practical
implications. From a care perspective, agency is relational, and
individuals are nonsovereign and heteronomous. Taking up insights
about our varied proximity to states of dependency throughout the
course of life arising in the field of disability studies, thinkers
like Judith Butler have argued that vulnerability is both an enabling
and constraining feature of our ontological condition and one that is
often politically induced in particular populations, marking them as
“precarious” (Butler 2004, 2015). In her 2017 book 
The
Right to Maim
, Jasbir Puar draws on similar theoretical
approaches in disability studies and biopolitics to analyze and
critique the ways that the liberal nation-state
“debilitates” populations in order to discipline and
control them (Puar 2017). This recent work marks an interest among
feminist political theorists in exposing the myriad ways that
contemporary liberal and neoliberal frameworks care-lessly intensify
and/or manipulate vulnerability. Along with disability, these thinkers
seek to expose the ways that gender, race, ethnicity, immigration
status, and age are complexly enmeshed in these scenes of abandonment
(see also Fineman 2008 [2011]; Fraser 2022; Povinelli 2011; Collins
1990 [2000]). From a policy standpoint, care has also been front and
center for feminist political thinkers, especially in the wake of the
COVID-19 global pandemic, which exposed the radical insufficiency of
our infrastructures of care. The authors of 
The Care
Manifesto
 (known as “The Care Collective”, 2020)
explore how we might reorganize our institutions and relationships to
meet the moment, including reclaiming public spaces, making healthcare
for all a reality, and taking action to protect the natural world.



Some of the foundations and consequences of the care ethics approach
have also produced serious skepticism from feminist political
philosophers. First, there is the question of whether and, if so, how
women-as-care-givers have distinct virtues. Feminists as a whole have
long distanced themselves from the idea that women have any particular
essence, choosing instead to see femininity and its accompanying
virtues as social constructs, dispositions that result from culture
and conditioning, not biological givens. So for care ethicists to
champion the virtues that have inculcated femininity seems also to
champion a patriarchal system that relegates one gender to the role of
caretaker. The care ethicists’ answer to this problem has often
been to flip the hierarchy. That is, to claim that the work of the
household is more meaningful and sustaining than the work of the
polis. But critics, such as Drucilla Cornell, Mary Dietz, and Chantal
Mouffe, argue that such a revaluation keeps intact the dichotomy
between the private and the public and the old association of
women’s work with childcare (Butler & Scott [eds.] 1992;
Phillips [ed.] 1998: 386–389).



Feminist political theorists associated with the care tradition have
explored how the distinct values that arise from practices of care
might transform our political concepts, aims, and organizations. How
might those activities and values typically relegated to the private
realm provide an alternative to the traditional emphases in moral and
political philosophy on impartiality, rationality, and universal
principles of justice in the public realm? The care approach
challenged the default to abstract principles in political philosophy,
leading to intense debates between liberals who advocated universal
ideals of justice and care ethicists who advocated attention to the
particular, to relationships, to care. In Gilligan’s early work,
for instance, the care approach is presented as 
opposed
 to
what she terms “the justice approach”, giving the
impression that the two approaches are separate and mutually exclusive
styles of moral reasoning (Gilligan 1982). By the 1990s, however, many
care ethicists had revised their views. Rather than seeing care and
justice as mutually exclusive alternatives, they began to recognize
that attention to care should be accompanied by attention to fairness
(justice) in order to attend to the plight of those with whom we have
no immediate relation (Koggel 1998). Moreover, they recognized that
the need to evaluate existing practices or systems of care requires
applying principles of justice like equality and fairness (Held [ed.]
1995; Kittay 2002; Schutte 2002).



Like care, the history of Western philosophy has largely disregarded
the role of emotion in political life, in particular because
emotionality is frequently associated with women and racialized
others. However, feminist political philosophers have insisted on the
importance of this intersection (for example Hall 2005, Krause 2008,
and Nussbaum 2013). Building on the contributions of feminist care
ethicists and difference feminists who worked to show the significance
of positive affects typically associated with femininity in ethical
encounters—such as love, interest, and care—(see Held
[ed.] 1995; Tronto 1993), other thinkers worried that this appraisal
merely reified a false (gendered) dichotomy between reason and
emotion, mind and body. Instead, early work by Alison Jaggar (1989),
Elizabeth Spelman (1989 and 1991), Genevieve Lloyd (1984 [1993]),
Elizabeth Grosz (1994), and others argued that reason is both embodied
and emotion-laden, and that emotion has epistemic and moral value.
Building on this work, feminist political theorists have argued that
understanding the role of emotion and affect is crucial for
understanding a number of important political phenomena: motivation
for action (Krause 2008), collective action and community formation
(Beltrán 2009 & 2010; Butler 2004 & 2015), solidarity
and patriotism (Nussbaum 2006 and 2013), as well as vulnerability
(Fineman 2008 [2011]), racism and xenophobia (Ahmed 2004 [2014]; Anker
2014; Ioanide 2015). Meanwhile, others examine the political
significance of specific emotions, for instance: shame (Ahmed 2004
[2014]), grief (Butler 2004), anger (Cherry 2021; Spelman 1989; Lorde
1984), fear (Anker 2014), empathy (Hirji 2022), and love (Nussbaum
2013).



More recently, many feminist critics have turned their attention to
the ways that neoliberalism demands resiliency and self-reliance in
the face of increasing precarity. Some borrow from Michel
Foucault’s late work on biopolitics, examining how neoliberal
demands for autonomy, self-sufficiency, self-discipline, and
self-investment impact individuals on the level of subjectivity,
making both life and the possibility of political action to transform
the conditions of life increasingly untenable. Individuals, they
argue, are met with increasing vulnerability to economic forces and
fewer resources to overcome vulnerability due to social isolation and
limited access to social services (Butler 2015; Povinelli 2011). Some
feminists study how subjectivity, affect, and morality accommodate
these neoliberal trends. For instance, this shows up in how the demand
to “overcome vulnerability” via the contemporary emphasis
on individual “resilience” attempts to transform
vulnerable persons, especially women, into productive neoliberal
subjects (James 2015), how productive emotions like
“happiness” are encouraged and unruly ones like
“willfulness” are discouraged (Berlant 2011; Ahmed 2014),
or how the targeted discourse around “self-care” can
contribute to individualist consumer culture that diminishes
women’s capacities for collective action (Ahmed 2017). Instead,
many feminist critiques challenge neoliberal individualism by
reasserting that agency need not be synonymous with autonomy, and
propose nonsovereign or relational accounts of the agentic subject
instead (Butler 2015). Along with care, some theorists have turned to
contemplative practices like meditation (in the Zen Buddhist
tradition, for instance) to recover important resources for democratic
life (Mariotti 2020).


2.6 Intersectional Feminisms



One of the issues that has been most vexing and generative for
feminist theory in general and feminist political philosophy in
particular is the matter of identity (see the entry on
 
identity politics
).
 Identity politics, itself a politically vexed term, refers to
political practices of mobilizing for change on the basis of a
political identity (women, Black, Chicana, etc.; see Alcoff 2006;
Matsuda 1996). The philosophical debate is whether such identities are
based on some real difference or history of oppression, and also
whether people should embrace identities that have historically been
used to oppress them. Identity politics in feminist practice is
fraught because for some feminists, concerns about identity are
thought to weaken feminist political unity and solidarity (Hooker
2009; Zerilli 2005). As Emi Koyama writes in the introduction to
“The Transfeminist Manifesto”:





The latter half of the twentieth century witnessed an unprecedented
broadening of American feminist movement as the result of the
participation of diverse groups of women. When a group of women who
had previously been marginalized within the mainstream of the feminist
movement broke their silence, demanding their rightful place within
it, they were first accused of fragmenting feminism with trivial
matters, and then were eventually accepted and welcomed as a valuable
part of the feminist thought. We have become increasingly aware that
the diversity is our strength, not weakness. (Koyama 2001: 11)





Moreover, feminist theorists of color have shown (Davis 1981; hooks
1981; Lorde 1984; Mohanty 1991) that the feminist movement has always
elevated the interests of some groups and ignored or disfigured the
interests of others. What looks like unity or neutrality is often
exclusion. Indeed, those for whom “woman” is only one of
several sources for group identification (e.g, Black women) have
raised questions about which identity is foremost or whether either
identity is apt. Such questions play out with the question of
 
political representation
—what
 aspects of identity are politically salient and truly representative,
whether race, class, or gender (Phillips 1995; Young 1997, 2000). The
ontological question of women’s identity gets played out on the
political stage when it comes to matters of political representation,
group rights, and affirmative action. The 2008 U.S. Democratic Party
primary battle between Senators Barack Obama and Hillary Clinton
turned this philosophical question into a very real and heated one
from Black women throughout the United States. Was a Black woman who
supported Clinton a traitor to her race, or a Black woman who
supported Obama a traitor to her sex? Or did it make any sense to talk
about identity in a way that would lead to charges of treason?



Theories of intersectionality emerged in the U.S. context from the
groundbreaking work of multiple thinkers (for an excellent history of
the emergence of “intersectionality” within Black feminist
and womanist thought, see J. Nash 2019), including Kimberlé
Crenshaw’s “Demarginalizing the Intersection of Race and
Sex: A Black Feminist Critique of Antidiscrimination Doctrine,
Feminist Theory and Antiracist Practice” (Crenshaw 1989),
Patricia Hill Collins’s book 
Black Feminist Thought:
Knowledge, Consciousness and the Politics of Empowerment
 (Collins
1990), Angela Davis’s 
Women, Race, and Class
 (Davis
1981), Audre Lorde’s 
Sister Outsider
 (1984), and
Patricia Williams’s 
The Alchemy of Race and Rights

(Williams 1991). While their specific language and emphasis varies,
these theorists and others generally agree that intersectionality is
an analytic framework that helps to understand how oppression and
privilege along particular “axes” of identity (gender,
race, class, disability, and the like) do not work independently, but
intermesh in complex ways that shape our social relations, identities,
interests, and experiences. The impact of this work was felt strongly
where it originated in feminist legal theory (see
 
feminist philosophy of law
),
 and has continued to be an important concept for theories of power
and oppression in and out of feminist political philosophy. (See also
the section on
 
intersectionality

 in the entry on
 
discrimination
.)


2.7 Transnational, Decolonial, and Indigenous Feminisms



While intersectionality emerged largely within the U.S. context,
transnational, decolonial, and indigenous feminists theorize the
political across, between, and against nation-state borders. Indeed,
“the border” becomes an important geopolitical, cultural,
and symbolic figure animating the work of feminist thinkers in this
area. Here, like elsewhere in feminist political philosophy, new ideas
in philosophy are often generated through the examination of practical
political concerns in the lives of women. For scholars working in
these areas, many of the issues and theories discussed emerge from
ongoing histories of
 
colonialism
,
 settler colonialism, and imperialism.



The writings of postcolonial and transnational feminist theorists
often raised the need for awareness of multiple global perspectives as
a challenge to Euro- and Anglo-centric feminist theory by focusing on
the lived realities of women in the Global South, such as issues
related to working conditions and migration (Walia 2013). Chandra
Talpade Mohanty’s 
Feminism without Borders
 (2003) is a
pathbreaking work in this respect, examining both the theoretical and
practical political consequences of global capitalism for women across
the globe and for the future of feminist struggle. In the Middle
Eastern context, Lila Abu-Lughod famously asked “Do Muslim Women
Need Saving?” (2013), challenging the notion in many strains
dominant in Western feminism that Muslim women are oppressed by their
own culture (for more on culture see Narayan 1997). Discussing the
impact of transnational feminist work during this period, Sharon
Krause writes that, “this development involved the ‘world
diversification’ of feminism to a more global, comparative, and
differentiated body of work” (Krause 2011: 106). This
diversification, Krause notes, is also due to new literature on
intersectionality, that is, the ways in which the intersections of our
multiple identities (race, gender, orientation, ethnicity, etc.) all
need to be attended to in talking about political change (Krause 2011:
107). Intersectionality also resonates with discussions of
“hybridity” in postcolonial literature, of religion and
globalization, and of the experiences of LGBTQ people. “The
result is an explosion of knowledge about the lived experience of
differently placed and multiply-positioned women” (2011: 107).
Given so many sources of difference and division among women across
the globe, is a transnational feminist solidarity possible? Are there
universal values and commitments on which to ground feminist activism
and solidarity that do not reproduce Western ethnocentrism and
imperialism? (For approaches to these questions, see Khader 2019.)



While transnational feminist theorists are largely concerned with the
impacts of cross-border 
global
 processes, indigenous feminist
contributions to political theory in the U.S. and Canada have
developed important critiques of settler colonialism and 
its

borders (for more on settler colonial states, decolonial resistance,
and post-colonial theory see the entry on
 
colonialism
).
 Audra Simpson’s 
Mohawk Interruptus: Political Life Across
the Borders of Settler States
 (2014) “interrupts”
settler colonial conceptualizations of political terms like legitimacy
and sovereignty with alternative meanings rooted in Kahnawà:ke
Mohawk life and the political history of the Iroquois Confederacy.
(See also Leanne Betasamosake Simpson 2017 on place-based resistance
to settler colonialism.) In the Australian context, Aileen
Moreton-Robinson challenges the ways that white women inside and
outside of the academy benefit from colonialism and strategically
wield power against indigenous women (Moreton-Robinson 2000). These
concerns mark a broader and increasing focus among indigenous,
decolonial, and intersectional feminists on critiques of whiteness
(see also Alcoff 2006 & 2015).



Decolonial feminists overlap in many areas with other women of color
feminists, but they bring several unique concerns specific to the
colonial and post-colonial experience. In contemporary decolonial
theory, these concerns are largely framed within the discourse of
“coloniality”, first theorized in terms of
“coloniality of power” by Anibal Quijano (2003). Here,
“coloniality” refers to how relations between colonizer
and colonized are racialized, for instance how labor, subjectivity,
and authority are racialized around the colonial system of capitalist
exploitation. (For more on “coloniality”, see Lugones
2010; Mignolo 2000; Maldonado Torres 2008; Wynter 2003.) For feminist
thinkers like María Lugones (2007, 2010), gender is another
axis around which the global capitalist system of power classifies and
dehumanizes colonized people. For Lugones and others, including
Oyèrónkẹ́ Oyěwùmí (1997),
gender is a colonial imposition in tension with non-modern
cosmologies, economies, and modes of kinship. Lugones calls this the
“coloniality of gender”, noting that de-colonizing gender
is part of a wider project of decolonial resistance opposed to the
categorial, dichotomous, and hierarchical logics of capitalist
modernity that are rooted in the colonization of the Americas.
According to Lugones, the autonomous, independent, and univocal
conception of the self is one of the Eurocentric “logics of
purity” that has become culturally dominant, shaping our modes
of political thought and action in ways that pathologize decolonial
resistance. Lugones’ critique is especially evident in her claim
that colonized people are not agents. Here, she does not mean that the
colonized and oppressed, including colonized women, lack capacities
for action and resistance—indeed, she argues that resistance
meets oppression “enduringly”. Rather, she points out that
according to the Eurocentric logic that defines agency as fully
capacitated, intentional, and autonomous, colonized people are
considered non-agential (Lugones 2005: 86). Instead, she develops the
concept “active subjectivity” to name the kinds of
resistant practices that develop under conditions of oppression.
Rather than a feminist or decolonial “unity” that
collapses difference, Lugones seeks to sustain forms of coalition
across difference (Lugones 2003). (See also the section “Latin
American Feminist Philosophy” in the entry on
 
Latin American Feminism
.)



In feminist decolonial literature, resistance is often discussed in
terms of the coloniality of gender (Lugones 2003, 2007, 2010;
Oyěwùmí 1997); language (Spivak 1988); identity and
subjectivity—for instance, accounts of hybridity,
border-thinking, multiplicity, and 
mestizaje
 (Anzaldúa
1987; Ortega 2016; Moraga & Anzaldúa [eds] 1981 [2015];
Pitts 2021a); and “world-traveling” (Lugones 1995; Ortega
2016). Many of these same thinkers argue that feminism itself must be
decolonized, critiquing feminist universalisms that claim to account
for the complex intersections of sexuality, race, gender, and class
(see Khader 2019; Lugones 2010; Mohanty 2003; Vergès 2019
[2021]).


2.8 Feminist Democratic Theory



Are there any reliable foundations on which to base feminist politics?
By the end of the 1990s, postmodern critiques of the subject and
feminist critiques of the category “woman” produced real
uncertainty about the status of the subject of feminist politics,
seeing a radical danger of relativism and disunity, and the field
seemed to be at an impasse. But then another approach began to emerge.
As Mary Dietz writes in her 2003 essay on current controversies in
feminist theory,





In recent years, political theorists have been engaged in debates
about what it might mean to conceptualize a feminist political praxis
that is aligned with democracy but does not begin from the binary of
gender. Along these lines, Mouffe (1992b: 376, 378; 1993), for
example, proposes a feminist conception of democratic citizenship that
would render sexual difference “effectively nonpertinent”.
Perhaps the salient feature of such conceptions is the turn toward
plurality, which posits democratic society as a field of interaction
where multiple axes of difference, identity, and subordination
politicize and intersect. (Dietz 2003: 419; citing Phelan 1994; Young
1990, 1997, 2000; Benhabib 1992; Honig 1992; K. Ferguson 1993;
Phillips 1993, 1995; Mouffe 1993; Yeatman 1994, 2001; Bickford 1996;
Dean 1996; Fraser 1997; K. Nash 1998; Heyes 2000; McAfee 2000)





Following up on what has happened in feminist political theory since
Dietz’s article, Sharon Krause writes that this work is
“contesting the old assumption that agency equals
autonomy” and makes room “within agency for forms of
subjectivity and action that are nonsovereign but nevertheless
potent” (Krause 2011; citing Amy Allen 2008, Beltrán
2010, Butler 2004, Hirschmann 2003, and Zerilli 2005.) “For some
theorists”, Krause writes,





this shift involves thinking of agency and freedom in more collective
ways, which emphasize solidarity, relationality, and constitutive
intersubjectivity. (Krause 2011: 108; citing Butler 2004; Cornell
2007; Mohanty 2003; and Nedelsky 2005)





(As we saw in the previous section, decolonial feminists like Lugones
were already critiquing Eurocentric conceptualizations of agency that
presume individual autonomy and sovereignty [Lugones 2003].)



This constellation of thinkers have a performative account of politics
and subjectivity. Performative in several senses: in theorizing how
agency is constituted, how political judgments can be made in the
absence of known rules (Honig 2009: 309), how new universals can be
created and new communities constituted. From a performative feminist
perspective, feminism is a project of anticipating and creating better
political futures in the absence of foundations. As Linda Zerilli
writes,





politics is about making claims and judgments—and having the
courage to do so—in the absence of the objective criteria or
rules that could provide certain knowledge and the guarantee that
speaking in women’s name will be accepted or taken up by others.
(Zerilli 2005: 179)





Zerilli calls for a “freedom-centered feminism” that





would strive to bring about transformation in normative conceptions of
gender without returning to the classical notion of freedom as
sovereignty





that feminists have long criticized but found difficult to resist
(ibid.). Rather than basing politics on already existing categories,
principles, or values, a performative approach understands categories
like identity and gender to be performatively constituted, thus
appealing to other people, not to supposed universal truths or
foundations. “How we assume these identities”, Drucilla
Cornell writes,





is never something “out there” that effectively determines
who we can be as men and women—gay, lesbian, straight, queer,
transsexual, transgender, or otherwise. (Cornell 2003: 144)





It is something that is shaped as we live and externalize identities
with others.



This view takes democracy to be an ongoing and unfinished project with
any outcome open to further contestation. It recuperates many of the
ideals of the Enlightenment—such as freedom, autonomy, and
justice—but in a way that drops the Enlightenment’s
metaphysical assumptions about reason, progress, and human nature.
Instead of seeing these ideals as grounded in some metaphysical facts,
this new view sees them as ideals that people hold and try to
instantiate through practice and imagination. Where many ancient and
modern ideals of politics were based on suppositions about the nature
of reality or of human beings, contemporary political philosophies
generally operate without supposing that there are any universal or
eternal truths. Some might see this situation as ripe for nihilism,
arbitrariness, or the exercise of brute power. The democratic
alternative is to imagine and try to create a better world by
anticipating, claiming, and appealing to others that it should be so.
Even if there is no metaphysical truth that human beings have dignity
and infinite worth, people can act as if it were true in order to
create a world in which it is seen to be so.



Despite the shared post-foundational theorizing among democratic
feminist theorists and the commitment to thinking of politics as
plural, when it comes to thinking about democratic politics, there are
sharp divergences, namely on the question of “what it means to
actualize public spaces and enact democratic politics” (Dietz
2003: 419). On this question, theorists tend to diverge into two
groups: associational and agonistic. Associational theorists (e.g.,
Benhabib 1992, [ed.] 1996b; Benhabib & Cornell [eds] 1987; Fraser
1989; Young 1990, 1997, 2000) gravitate more toward deliberative
democratic theory. They have roots in the socialist and Marxist
traditions, especially as they developed in the Frankfurt-School
tradition of critical theory. They are more optimistic about the
prospects for democracy. Agonistic theorists (e.g., Mouffe [ed.]
1992a, 1993, 1999, 2000; Honig [ed.] 1995; Ziarek 2001) worry that
democratic theories that focus on consensus can silence the kind of
disagreement essential for democratic progress. Thus they focus more
on plurality, dissensus, and the ceaseless contestation within
politics. Agonistic theorists are grounded in much of the
poststructural feminist approach described earlier, wary of any claims
to universality and identity.



The differences spring from, or perhaps lead to, different readings of
the philosopher who has most inspired performative political theory:
 
Hannah Arendt
,
 namely Arendt’s ideas of speech and action in the public
sphere, of the meaning of plurality, of the ways in which human beings
can distinguish themselves. As Bonnie Honig, a champion of the
agonistic model writes,





Political theorists and feminists, in particular, have long criticized
Arendt for the agonistic dimensions of her politics, charging that
agonism is a masculinist, heroic, violent, competitive, (merely)
aesthetic, or necessarily individualistic practice. For these
theorists, the notion of an agonistic feminism would be, at best, a
contradiction in terms and, at worst, a muddled and, perhaps,
dangerous idea. Their perspective is effectively endorsed by Seyla
Benhabib who, in a recent series of powerful essays, tries to rescue
Arendt for feminism by excising agonism from her thought. (Honig
1995b: 156)





Associational theorists tend to look for ways, amidst all the
differences and questions about the lack of foundations, it is
possible to come to agreement on matters of common concern. This is
seen in feminist democratic theory, perhaps best known through the
works of Seyla Benhabib (1992, 1996b), greatly inspired by her
non-agonistic reading of Arendt and of the work of the German critical
theorist, Jürgen Habermas. Benhabib’s work engages
democratic theorists quite broadly, not just feminist theorists. The
following passage helps to clarify what she takes to be the best aim
of a political philosophy: a state of affairs to which all affected
would assent. As she writes,





Only those norms (i.e., general rules of action and institutional
arrangements) can be said to be valid (i.e., morally binding), which
would be agreed to by all those affected by their consequences, if
such agreement were reached as a consequence of a process of
deliberation that had the following features: 1) participation in such
deliberation is governed by norms of equality and symmetry; all have
the same chances to initiate speech acts, to question, to interrogate,
and to open debate; 2) all have the right to question the assigned
topics of conversation; and 3) all have the right to initiate
reflexive arguments about the very rules of the discourse procedure
and the way in which they are applied or carried out. (Benhabib 1996b:
70)





Following Habermas, Benhabib contends that certain conditions need to
be in place in order for members of a political community to arrive at
democratic outcomes, namely the proceedings need to be deliberative.
Some take deliberation to be a matter of reasoned argumentation;
others see it as less about reason or argumentation but more about an
open process of working through choices. (McAfee 2004.)



Not all theorists who tend toward the associational model embrace
deliberative theory so readily. Iris Young’s pioneering book,

Justice and the Politics of Difference
 and several of her
subsequent works have been very influential and led to a good deal of
hesitance in feminist theoretical communities about the claims of
deliberative theory. Where Benhabib is confident that conditions can
be such that all who are affected can have a voice in deliberations,
Young points out that those who have been historically silenced have a
difficult time having their views heard or heeded. Young is skeptical
of the claims of mainstream democratic theory that democratic
deliberative processes could lead to outcomes that would be acceptable
to all (Young 1990, 1997). Young, along with Nancy Fraser (1989) and
others, worried that in the process of trying to reach consensus, the
untrained voices of women and others who have been marginalized would
be left out of the final tally. Young’s criticisms were very
persuasive, leading a generation of feminist political philosophers to
be wary of deliberative democratic theory. Instead of deliberative
democracy, in the mid 1990s Young proposed a theory of communicative
democracy, hoping to make way for a deliberative conception that was
open to means of expression beyond the rational expression of
mainstream deliberative democratic theory. Young worried that
deliberation as defined by Habermas is too reason-based and leaves out
forms of communication that women and people of color tend to use,
including, as she puts it, “greeting, rhetoric, and
storytelling”. Young argued that these alternative modes of
communication could provide the basis of a more democratic,
communicative theory. In her last major book, 
Inclusion and
Democracy
 (2000), Young had clearly moved to embrace deliberative
theory itself, seeing the ways in which it could be constructed to
give voice to those who had been otherwise marginalized. More recent
feminist democratic theory has engaged deliberative theory more
positively (see McAfee & Snyder 2007).



Where liberal feminists inspired by
 
John Rawls

 and democratic feminists inspired by
 
Jürgen Habermas

 and/or
 
John Dewey

 hold out the hope that democratic deliberations might lead to
democratic agreements, agonistic feminists are wary of consensus as
inherently undemocratic. Agonistic feminist political philosophy comes
out of poststructural continental feminist and philosophical
traditions. It takes from Marxism the hope for a more radically
egalitarian society. It takes from contemporary continental philosophy
notions of subjectivity and solidarity as malleable and constructed.
Along with postmodern thought, it repudiates any notion of
pre-existing moral or political truths or foundations (Ziarek 2001).
Its central claim is that feminist struggle, like other struggles for
social justice, is engaged in politics as ceaseless contestation.
Agonistic views see the nature of politics as inherently conflictual,
with battles over the direction of political society being the central
task of democratic struggle. Advocates of agonistic politics worry
that the kind of consensus sought by democratic theorists (discussed
above) will lead to some kind of oppression or injustice by silencing
new struggles. As Chantal Mouffe puts it,





We have to accept that every consensus exists as a temporary result of
a provisional hegemony, as a stabilization of power, and that it
always entails some form of exclusion. (Mouffe 2000: 104)





Where associational theorists seek out ways that people can overcome
systematically distorted communication and deliberation, Dietz notes
that agonists eschew this project because they understand politics
as





essentially a practice of creation, reproduction, transformation and
articulation.... Simply put, associational feminists scrutinize the
conditions of exclusion in order to theorize the emancipation of the
subject in the public sphere of communicative interaction; agonistic
feminists deconstruct emancipatory procedures to disclose how the
subject is both produced through political exclusions and positioned
against them. (Dietz 2003: 422)




3. New Directions in Feminist Political Philosophy



As a recent review writes,





Feminist theory today is a sprawling, productive, diverse intellectual
and political assemblage. It grows through imaginative
interdisciplinary work and critical political engagements. Feminist
theory is not only about women, although it is that; it is about the
world, engaged through critical intersectional perspectives. (K.
Ferguson 2017)





New work in feminist political philosophy continues to transform
political philosophy, including ancient debates over identity versus
difference, the private and the public, certainty and freedom. For
example, new readings of Arendt’s philosophy offer hope of
moving beyond the associational/agonistic divide in democratic
feminist theory (Barker et al. [eds] 2012). Benhabib’s
proceduralism is being surpassed with more affect-laden accounts of
deliberation (Krause 2008; Howard 2017). Instead of the rational
back-and-forth of reasoned argumentation, theorists are beginning to
see deliberative talk as forms of constituting the subject, judging
without pre-conceived truths, and performatively creating new
political projects (Zerilli 2005 and 2016).



Some of the most generative sites for feminist political theorizing
today are the global threats that face all of us, for instance
environmental degradation or the rise of authoritarianism. In
ecofeminist perspectives, as the entry on
 
feminist environmental philosophy

 explains, the domination and destruction of “nature” has
long been recognized as a feminist issue of political significance
(especially due to the deep associations between femininity and nature
that run through Western patriarchal philosophy and culture). More
recently, ecofeminists have extended theories of democracy, agency,
and rights to include elements of the natural world (Nussbaum 2022).
Meanwhile, with the rise of authoritarianism in governments across the
globe in the second decade of the twenty-first century, feminist
political philosophers have tried to understand the roots of recent
threats to democracy (Fraser 2019; McAfee 2019; Nussbaum 2018).



In sum, feminist political philosophy is a still evolving field of
thought that has much to offer mainstream political philosophy. In the
past two decades it has come to exert a stronger influence over
mainstream political theorizing, raising objections that mainstream
philosophers have had to address, though not always very convincingly.
And in its newest developments it promises to go even further.






Bibliography




Abbey, Ruth, 2011, 
The Return of Feminist Liberalism
,
Durham, UK: Acumen.


Abu-Lughod, Lila (ed.), 1998, 
Remaking Women: Feminism and
Modernity in the Middle East
, (Princeton Studies in
Culture/Power/History), Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
doi:10.1515/9781400831203


–––, 2013, 
Do Muslim Women Need
Saving?
, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
doi:10.4159/9780674726338


Ackerly, Brooke A., 2000, 
Political Theory and Feminist Social
Criticism
, (Contemporary Political Theory), Cambridge/New York:
Cambridge University Press. doi:10.1017/CBO9780511490149


Ackerly, Brooke A. and Susan Moller Okin, 1999, “Feminist
Social Criticism and the International Movement for Women’s
Rights as Human Rights”, in 
Democracy’s Edges
,
Ian Shapiro and Casiano Hacker-Cordón (eds), Cambridge/New
York: Cambridge University Press, 134–162.
doi:10.1017/CBO9780511586361.010


Ahmed, Sara, 2000, 
Strange Encounters: Embodied Others in
Post-Coloniality
, (Transformations), London/New York: Routledge.
doi:10.4324/9780203349700


–––, 2004 [2014], 
The Cultural Politics of
Emotion
, Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press. Second edition,
2014.


–––, 2010, 
The Promise of Happiness
,
Durham, NC: Duke University Press. doi:10.1215/9780822392781


–––, 2014, 
Willful Subjects
, Durham,
NC: Duke University Press. doi:10.1215/9780822376101


–––, 2017, 
Living a Feminist Life
,
Durham, NC: Duke University Press. doi:10.1215/9780822373377


Alcoff, Linda Martín, 2006, 
Visible Identities: Race,
Gender, and the Self
, (Studies in Feminist Philosophy), New
York/Oxford: Oxford University Press.
doi:10.1093/0195137345.001.0001


–––, 2015, 
The Future of Whiteness
,
Cambridge, UK: Polity Press.


Alexander, M. Jacqui, 2005, 
Pedagogies of Crossing:
Meditations on Feminism, Sexual Politics, Memory, and the Sacred
,
(Perverse Modernities), Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
doi:10.1215/9780822386988


Allen, Amy, 2005, “Feminist Perspectives on Power”,

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy
 (Winter 2005 edition),
Edward N. Zalta (ed.), URL =
 <
https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/win2005/entries/feminist-power/
>.


–––, 2008, 
The Politics of Our Selves:
Power, Autonomy, and Gender in Contemporary Critical Theory
, (New
Directions in Critical Theory), New York: Columbia University
Press.


Allen, Anita L., 2011, 
Unpopular Privacy: What Must We
Hide?
, (Studies in Feminist Philosophy), Oxford/New York: Oxford
University Press. doi:10.1093/acprof:oso/9780195141375.001.0001


Altman, Andrew and Lori Watson, 2019, 
Debating
Pornography
, (Debating Ethics), New York: Oxford University
Press. doi:10.1093/oso/9780199358700.001.0001


Anderson, Elizabeth, 2023, 
Hijacked: How Neoliberalism Turned
the Work Ethic against Workers and How Workers Can Take It Back
,
Cambridge/New York: Cambridge University Press.
doi:10.1017/9781009275422


Anker, Elisabeth R., 2014, 
Orgies of Feeling: Melodrama and
the Politics of Freedom
, Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
doi:10.1215/9780822376545


Anzaldúa, Gloria, 1987, 
Borderlands/La Frontera: The
New Mestiza
, San Francisco, CA: Aunt Lute Foundation Books.


Baehr, Amy, 2017, “A Capacious Account of Liberal
Feminism”, 
Feminist Philosophy Quarterly
, 3(1): Article
4. doi:10.5206/fpq/2016.3.4


Barker, Derek W. M., Noëlle McAfee, and McIvor David W.
(eds), 2012, 
Democratizing Deliberation: A Political Theory
Anthology
, Dayton, OH: Kettering Foundation.


Beltrán, Cristina, 2009, “Going Public: Hannah
Arendt, Immigrant Action, and the Space of Appearance”,

Political Theory
, 37(5): 595–622.
doi:10.1177/0090591709340134


–––, 2010, 
The Trouble with Unity: Latino
Politics and the Creation of Identity
, Oxford/New York: Oxford
University Press.


Benhabib, Seyla, 1992, 
Situating the Self: Gender, Community,
and Postmodernism in Contemporary Ethics
, New York: Routledge.
doi:10.4324/9781003059516


––– (ed.), 1996a, 
Democracy and Difference:
Contesting the Boundaries of the Political
, Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press.


–––, 1996b, “Toward a Deliberative Model
of Democratic Legitimacy”, in 
Democracy and Difference
,
Seyla Benhabib (ed.), Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press,
67–94. doi:10.1515/9780691234168-005


–––, 2002, 
The Claims of Culture: Equality
and Diversity in the Global Era
, Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press.


–––, 2006, 
Another Cosmopolitanism
,
Robert Post (ed.), (Berkeley Tanner Lectures), Oxford/New York: Oxford
University Press. doi:10.1093/acprof:oso/9780195183221.001.0001


Benhabib, Seyla, Judith Butler, Drucilla Cornell, and Nancy
Fraser, 1995, 
Feminist Contentions: A Philosophical Exchange
,
(Thinking Gender), New York: Routledge.


Benhabib, Seyla and Drucilla Cornell (eds), 1987, 
Feminism as
Critique: On the Politics of Gender
, (Feminist Perspectives),
Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press.


Berlant, Lauren Gail, 2011, 
Cruel Optimism
, Durham, NC:
Duke University Press. doi:10.1215/9780822394716


Bhandary, Asha, 2020, 
Freedom to Care: Liberalism, Dependency
Care, and Culture
, New York: Routledge.
doi:10.4324/9780429283093


Bhandary, Asha and Amy R. Baehr (eds), 2021, 
Caring for
Liberalism: Dependency and Liberal Political Theory
, New York:
Routledge. doi:10.4324/9781351186315


Bhattacharya, Tithi (ed.), 2017, 
Social Reproduction Theory:
Remapping Class, Recentering Oppression
, London: Pluto
Press.


Bickford, Susan, 1996, 
The Dissonance of Democracy: Listening,
Conflict, and Citizenship
, Ithaca, NY: Cornell University
Press.


Brown, Wendy, 1988, 
Manhood and Politics: A Feminist Reading
in Political Theory
, (New Feminist Perspectives Series), Totowa,
NJ: Rowman & Littlefield.


–––, 1995, 
States of Injury: Power and
Freedom in Late Modernity
, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
Press.


–––, 1997, “The Impossibility of
Women’s Studies”, 
Differences
, 9(3):
79–101. doi:10.1215/10407391-9-3-79


–––, 2000, “Suffering Rights as
Paradoxes”, 
Constellations
, 7(2): 230–241.
doi:10.1111/1467-8675.00183


–––, 2005, 
Edgework: Critical Essays on
Knowledge and Politics
, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
Press.


–––, 2015, 
Undoing the Demos:
Neoliberalism’s Stealth Revolution
, (Near Futures),
Brooklyn, NY: Zone Books.


Butler, Judith, 1990, 
Gender Trouble: Feminism and the
Subversion of Identity
, New York: Routledge.
doi:10.4324/9780203824979


–––, 1993, 
Bodies That Matter: On the
Discursive Limits of “Sex”
, New York: Routledge.
doi:10.4324/9780203828274


–––, 1995, “Contingent Foundations:
Feminism and the Question of ‘Postmodernism’”, in
Benhabib et al. 1995: 35–58.


–––, 1997a, 
The Psychic Life of Power:
Theories in Subjection
, Stanford, CA: Stanford University
Press.


–––, 1997b, 
Excitable Speech: A Politics of
the Performative
, New York: Routledge.
doi:10.4324/9781003146759


–––, 2000, “Restaging the Universal:
Hegemony and the Limits of Formalism”, in 
Contingency,
Hegemony, Universality: Contemporary Dialogues on the Left
,
Judith Butler, Ernesto Laclau, Slavoj Žižek (eds), London:
Verso, 11–43.


–––, 2004, 
Precarious Life: The Powers of
Mourning and Violence
, London/New York: Verso.


–––, 2015, 
Notes Toward a Performative
Theory of Assembly
, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.


Butler, Judith P. and Joan Wallach Scott (eds), 1992,

Feminists Theorize the Political
, New York: Routledge.
doi:10.4324/9780203723999


Butler, Judith and Gayatri Chakravorty Spivak, 2007, 
Who Sings
the Nation State? Language, Politics, Belonging
, London: Seagull
Books.


Care Collective [Chatzidakis, Andreas, Jamie Hakim, Jo Littler,
Catherine Rottenberg, and Lynne Segal], 2020, 
The Care Manifesto:
The Politics of Interdependence
, London/New York: Verso.


Carlson, Licia, 2010, 
The Faces of Intellectual Disability:
Philosophical Reflections
, Bloomington, IN: Indiana University
Press.


Cavarero, Adriana, 2003 [2005], 
A più voci: Per una
filosofia dell’espressione vocale
, Milan: Feltrinelli.
Translated as 
For More than One Voice: Toward a Philosophy of
Vocal Expression
, Paul A. Kottman (trans.), Stanford, CA:
Stanford University Press, 2005.


–––, 2014 [2016], 
Inclinazioni: Critica
della rettitudine
, Milan: Rafaello Cortina Editore. Translated as

Inclinations: A Critique of Rectitude
, Amanda Minervini and
Adam Sitze (trans.), (Square One: First-Order Questions in the
Humanities), Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 2016.


Chambers, Clare, 2017a, 
Against Marriage: An Egalitarian
Defense of the Marriage-Free State
, (Oxford Political Theory),
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
doi:10.1093/oso/9780198744009.001.0001


–––, 2017b, “Feminism and
Liberalism”, in 
The Routledge Companion to Feminist
Philosophy
, Ann Garry, Serene J. Khader, and Alison Stone (eds),
Routledge.


Cherry, Myisha V., 2021, 
The Case for Rage: Why Anger Is
Essential to Anti-Racist Struggle
, New York: Oxford University
Press. doi:10.1093/oso/9780197557341.001.0001


Collins, Patricia Hill, 1990 [2000], 
Black Feminist Thought:
Knowledge, Consciousness, and the Politics of Empowerment
,
(Perspectives on Gender 2), Boston: Unwin Hyman. Second edition, New
York: Routledge, 2000. doi:10.4324/9780203900055


–––, 2004, 
Black Sexual Politics: African
Americans, Gender, and the New Racism
, New York: Routledge.
doi:10.4324/9780203309506


–––, 2019, 
Intersectionality as Critical
Social Theory
, Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
doi:10.1215/9781478007098


Coole, Diana H. and Samantha Frost (eds), 2010, 
New
Materialisms: Ontology, Agency, and Politics
, Durham, NC: Duke
University Press. doi:10.1215/9780822392996


Cornell, Drucilla, 1998, 
At the Heart of Freedom: Feminism,
Sex, and Equality
, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
Press.


–––, 2003, “Autonomy Re-Imagined”,

Journal for the Psychoanalysis of Culture and Society
, 8(1):
144–149. doi:10.1353/psy.2003.0008


–––, 2007, 
Moral Images of Freedom: A Future
for Critical Theory
, (New Critical Theory), Lanham, MD: Rowman
& Littlefield Publishers.


Crenshaw, Kimberlé, 1989, “Demarginalizing the
Intersection of Race and Sex: A Black Feminist Critique of
Antidiscrimination Doctrine, Feminist Theory and Antiracist
Politics”, 
University of Chicago Legal Forum
, 1989:
139–167.


Critchley, Simon, Jacques Derrida, Ernesto Laclau, and Richard
Rorty, 1996, 
Deconstruction and Pragmatism
, Chantal Mouffe
(ed.), Abingdon/New York: Routledge. doi:10.4324/9780203431481


Cudd, Ann E., 2006, 
Analyzing Oppression
, (Studies in
Feminist Philosophy), New York: Oxford University Press.
doi:10.1093/0195187431.001.0001


–––, 2012, “Resistance Is (Not) Futile:
Analytical Feminism’s Relation to Political Philosophy”,
in 
Out from the Shadows: Analytical Feminist Contributions to
Traditional Philosophy
, Sharon L. Crasnow and Anita M. Superson
(eds), Oxford/New York: Oxford University Press, 15–32.


Daly, Mary, 1973 [1985], 
Beyond God the Father: Toward a
Philosophy of Women’s Liberation
, Boston: Beacon Press. New
edition with a reintroduction, 1985.


–––, 1978 [1990], 
Gyn/Ecology: The
Metaethics of Radical Feminism
, Boston: Beacon Press. New edition
with a new introduction, 1990.


Davis, Angela Yvonne, 1981, 
Women, Race, & Class
, New
York: Random House.


–––, 2003, 
Are Prisons Obsolete?
, New
York: Seven Stories Press.


–––, 2005, 
Abolition Democracy: Beyond
Empire, Prisons, and Torture
, New York: Seven Stories Press.


–––, 2016, 
Freedom Is a Constant Struggle:
Ferguson, Palestine, and the Foundations of a Movement
, Frank
Barat (ed.), Chicago, IL: Haymarket Books.


Davis, Angela Y., Gina Dent, Erica R. Meiners, and Beth Richie,
2022, 
Abolition. Feminism. Now
 (The Abolitionist Papers
Series), Chicago, IL: Haymarket Books.


Dean, Jodi, 1996, 
Solidarity of Strangers: Feminism After
Identity Politics
, Berkeley, CA: University of California
Press.


–––, 2009, 
Democracy and Other Neoliberal
Fantasies: Communicative Capitalism & Left Politics
, Durham,
NC: Duke University Press. doi:10.1215/9780822390923


Delphy, Christine, 1984, 
Close to Home: A Materialist Analysis
of Women’s Oppression
, Diana Leonard (ed./trans.), Amherst,
MA: University of Massachusetts Press. Edition with an introduction by
Rachel Hills, New York: Verso Press, 2016.


Delphy, Christine and Diana Leonard, 1980, “A Materialist
Feminism is Possible”, 
Feminist Review
, 4:
79–105. doi:10.2307/1394771


Dietz, Mary G., 1985, “Citizenship with a Feminist Face: The
Problem with Maternal Thinking”, 
Political Theory
,
13(1): 19–37. doi:10.1177/0090591785013001003


–––, 1987, “Context Is All: Feminism and
Theories of Citizenship”, 
Daedalus
, 116(4):
1–24.


–––, 2002, 
Turning Operations: Feminism,
Arendt, and Politics
, New York: Routledge.
doi:10.4324/9781315023472


–––, 2003, “Current Controversies in
Feminist Theory”, 
Annual Review of Political Science
,
6: 399–431. doi:10.1146/annurev.polisci.6.121901.085635


Engels, Friedrich, 1884 [1902], 
Der Ursprung der Familie, des
Privateigenthums und des Staats
, Zürich. Translated as

The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State
, G.
E. Untermann (trans.), Chicago: Charles H. Kerr, 1902.


Federici, Silvia, 2004, 
Caliban and the Witch: Women, the Body
and Primitive Accumulation
, Brooklyn, NY: Autonomedia.


–––, 2012, 
Revolution at Point Zero:
Housework, Reproduction, and Feminist Struggle
, Oakland, CA: PM
Press. Second edition, 2020.


–––, 2021, 
Patriarchy of the Wage: Notes on
Marx, Gender, and Feminism. Electronic resource
, Oakland, CA: PM
Press.


Ferguson, Kathy E., 1993, 
The Man Question: Visions of
Subjectivity in Feminist Theory
, Berkeley, CA: University of
California Press.


–––, 2017, “Feminist Theory Today”,

Annual Review of Political Science
, 20(1): 269–286.
doi:10.1146/annurev-polisci-052715-111648


Ferguson, Susan J., 2019, 
Women and Work: Feminism, Labour,
and Social Reproduction
, (Mapping Social Reproduction Theory),
London: Pluto Press.


Fineman, Martha Albertson, 2008 [2011], “The Vulnerable
Subject: Anchoring Equality in the Human Condition”, 
Yale
Journal of Law & Feminism
, 20(1); reprinted in Martha
Albertson Fineman (ed.), 
Transcending the Boundaries of Law:
Generations of Feminism and Legal Theory
, London:
Routledge-Cavendish, 2011, 161–175.
 [
Fineman 2008 available online
].


Firestone, Shulamith, 1970, 
The Dialectic of Sex: The Case for
Feminist Revolution
, New York: William Morrow and Company.


Fraser, Nancy, 1989, 
Unruly Practices: Power, Discourse, and
Gender in Contemporary Social Theory
, Minneapolis, MN: University
of Minnesota Press.


–––, 1997, 
Justice Interruptus: Critical
Reflections on the “Postsocialist” Condition
, New
York: Routledge. doi:10.4324/9781315822174


–––, 2009, 
Scales of Justice: Reimagining
Political Space in a Globalizing World
, New York: Columbia
University Press.


–––, 2013, 
Fortunes of Feminism: From
State-Managed Capitalism to Neoliberal Crisis
, New York:
Verso.


–––, 2019, 
The Old is Dying and the New
Cannot be Born: From Progressive Neoliberalism to Trump and
Beyond
, New York: Verso.


–––, 2022, 
Cannibal Capitalism: How Our
System is Devouring Democracy, Care, the Planet—and What We Can
Do About It
, New York: Verso.


Fraser, Nancy and Rahel Jaeggi, 2018, 
Capitalism: A
Conversation in Critical Theory
, Cambridge, UK: Polity.


Frye, Marilyn, 1983, 
The Politics of Reality: Essays in
Feminist Theory
, Trumansburg, NY: Crossing Press.


Fuss, Diana, 1989, 
Essentially Speaking: Feminism, Nature
& Difference
, New York: Routledge.
doi:10.4324/9780203699294


Gago, Verónica, 2019 [2020], 
La potencia feminista: o
El deseo de cambiarlo todo
, (Colección Nociones comunes),
Buenos Aires, Argentina: Tinta Limón Ediciones. Translated as

Feminist International: How to Change Everything
, Liz
Mason-Deese (trans.), London/New York: Verso, 2020.


Garry, Ann, Serene J. Khader, and Alison Stone (eds), 2017,

The Routledge Companion to Feminist Philosophy
, (Routledge
Philosophy Companions), New York/Abingdon, Oxon: Routledge.
doi:10.4324/9781315758152


Gilligan, Carol, 1982, 
In a Different Voice: Psychological
Theory and Women’s Development
, Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.


Gilmore, Ruth Wilson, 2007, 
Golden Gulag: Prisons, Surplus,
Crisis, and Opposition in Globalizing California
, Berkeley, CA:
University of California Press.


–––, 2022, 
Abolition Geography: Essays
towards Liberation
, Brenna Bhandar and Alberto Toscano (eds),
London/New York: Verso.


Gimenez, Martha E., 2000, “What’s Material about
Materialist Feminism? A Marxist Feminist Critique”, 
Radical
Philosophy
, 101: 18–28.
 [
Gimenez 2000 available online
]


Gouges, Olympes de, 1791, “Déclaration des droits de
la femme et de la citoyenne” (Declaration of the Rights of Woman
and of the Female Citizen).
 [
Gouges 1791 available online (fr)
]


Gould, Carol C., 2004, 
Globalizing Democracy and Human
Rights
, Cambridge/New York: Cambridge University Press.
doi:10.1017/CBO9780511617096


Grewal, Inderpal, 2005, 
Transnational America: Feminisms,
Diasporas, Neoliberalisms
, (Next Wave), Durham, NC: Duke
University Press. doi:10.1215/9780822386544


Grosz, Elizabeth, 1994, 
Volatile Bodies: Toward a Corporeal
Feminism
, Indianapolis, IN: Indiana University Press.


Guenther, Lisa, 2013, 
Solitary Confinement: Social Death and
its Afterlives
, Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota
Press.


Habermas, Jürgen, 1962 [1989], 
Strukturwandel der
Öffentlichkeit: Untersuchungen zu einer Kategorie der
bürgerlichen Gesellschaft
, (Politica ; Abhandlungen
und Texte zur politischen Wissenschaft 4), Neuwied, Berlin:
Luchterhand. Translated as 
The Structural Transformation of the
Public Sphere: An Inquiry into a Category of Bourgeois Society
,
Thomas Burger and Frederick Lawrence (trans), (Studies in Contemporary
German Social Thought), Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1989.


–––, 1973 [1975], 
Legitimationsprobleme im
Spätkapitalismus
, (Edition Suhrkamp 623), Frankfurt (am
Main): Suhrkamp. Translated as 
Legitimation Crisis
, Thomas
McCarthy (trans.), Boston: Beacon Press, 1975.


Hall, Cheryl Ann, 2005, 
The Trouble with Passion: Political
Theory beyond the Reign of Reason
, New York: Routledge.
doi:10.4324/9780203952368


Held, Virginia (ed.), 1995, 
Justice and Care: Essential
Readings in Feminist Ethics
, Boulder, CO: Westview Press.


Heyes, Cressida J., 2000, 
Line Drawings: Defining Women
through Feminist Practice
, Ithaca, NY: Cornell University
Press.


Hirji, Sukaina, 2022, “Outrage and the Bounds of
Empathy”, 
Philosophers’ Imprint
, 22: article 16.
doi:10.3998/phimp.1296


Hirschmann, Nancy J., 2003, 
The Subject of Liberty: Toward a
Feminist Theory of Freedom
, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
Press.


–––, 2007, “Feminist Political
Philosophy”, in 
The Blackwell Guide to Feminist
Philosophy
, Linda Martín Alcoff and Eva Feder Kittay
(eds), Oxford: Blackwell Publishing, 145–164.
doi:10.1002/9780470696132.ch8


–––, 2008, 
Gender, Class, and Freedom in
Modern Political Theory
, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
Press.


Honig, Bonnie, 1992, “Toward an Agonistic Feminism: Hannah
Arendt and the Politics of Identity”, in Butler and Scott 1992:
215–235.


–––, 1993, 
Political Theory and the
Displacement of Politics
, Ithaca, NY: Cornell University
Press.


––– (ed.), 1995, 
Feminist Interpretations of
Hannah Arendt
, (Re-Reading the Canon), University Park, PA:
Pennsylvania State University Press.


–––, 1995b, “Toward an Agonistic Feminism:
Hannah Arendt and the Politics of Identity”, in 
Feminist
Interpretations of Hannah Arendt, 
Re-Reading the Canon), Bonnie
Honig (ed.), University Park, PA: Pennsylvania State University
Press.


–––, 2001, 
Democracy and the Foreigner
,
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.


–––, 2009, 
Emergency Politics: Paradox, Law,
Democracy
, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.


–––, 2011, “Ismene’s Forced Choice:
Sacrifice and Sorority in Sophocles’ Antigone”,

Arethusa
, 44(1): 29–68.
doi:10.1353/are.2011.a413524


–––, 2013, 
Antigone, Interrupted
,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
doi:10.1017/CBO9781139583084


–––, 2017, 
Public Things: Democracy in
Disrepair
, New York: Fordham University Press.


Honig, Bonnie and David Mapel (eds), 2002, 
Skepticism,
Individuality, and Freedom: The Reluctant Liberalism of Richard
Flathman
, Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press.


Hooker, Juliet, 2009, 
Race and the Politics of
Solidarity
, (Transgressing Boundaries: Studies in Black Politics
and Black Communities), Oxford/New York: Oxford University Press.
doi:10.1093/acprof:oso/9780195335361.001.0001


hooks, bell, 1981, 
Ain’t I a Woman: Black Women and
Feminism
, Boston, MA: South End Press.


Howard, Katie B., 2017, “The ‘Right to Have
Rights’ 65 Years Later: Justice Beyond Humanitarianism, Politics
Beyond Sovereignty”, 
Global Justice: Theory Practice
Rhetoric
, 10(1): 79–98. doi:10.21248/gjn.10.1.124


–––, 2019, “The Apparitions of Emotion:
Toward a Performative 
Affect
-Theory of Assembly”,

Raisons politiques
, 76(4): 107–120.
doi:10.3917/rai.076.0107


Hull, [Akasha] Gloria T., Patricia Bell Scott, and Barbara Smith
(eds), 1982, 
All the Women Are White, All the Blacks Are Men, but
Some of Us Are Brave: Black Women’s Studies
, Old Westbury,
NY: Feminist Press.


Irigaray, Luce, 1974 [1985a], 
Speculum de l’autre
femme
, (Collection critique), Paris: Editions de Minuit.
Translated as 
Speculum of the Other Woman
, Gillian C. Gill
(trans.), Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1985.


–––, 1977 [1985b], 
Ce sexe qui n’en
est pas un
, (Collection Critique), Paris: Éditions de
Minuit. Translated as 
This Sex Which Is Not One
, Catherine
Porter (trans.), Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1985.


–––, 1989 [1994], 
Le temps de la
différence: pour une révolution pacifique
, (Livre
de poche ; Biblio essais 4110), Paris: Librairie
générale française. Translated as 
Thinking
the Difference: For a Peaceful Revolution
, Karin Montin (trans.),
New York: Routledge, 1994.


–––, 1992 [1996], 
J’aime à toi:
esquisse d’une félicité dans
l’histoire
, Paris: B. Grasset. Translated as 
I Love to
You: Sketch for a Felicity within History
, Alison Martin
(trans.), New York: Routledge, 1996. doi:10.4324/9781315865959


Ioanide, Paula, 2015, 
The Emotional Politics of Racism: How
Feelings Trump Facts in an Era of Colorblindness
, (Stanford
Studies in Comparative Race and Ethnicity), Stanford, CA: Stanford
University Press.


Jaggar, Alison M., 1983, 
Feminist Politics and Human
Nature
, (Philosophy and Society), Totowa, NJ: Rowman &
Allanheld.


–––, 1989, “Love and Knowledge: Emotion in
Feminist Epistemology”, in 
Gender/Body/Knowledge: Feminist
Reconstructions of Being and Knowing
, Alison M. Jaggar and Susan
Bordo (eds), New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press,
145–171.


–––, 2005, “‘Saving Amina’:
Global Justice for Women and Intercultural Dialogue”, 
Ethics
& International Affairs
, 19(3): 55–75.
doi:10.1111/j.1747-7093.2005.tb00554.x


James, Robin, 2015, 
Resilience & Melancholy: Pop Music,
Feminism, Neoliberalism
, Winchester, UK/Washington, USA: Zero
Books.


Keating, AnaLouise (ed.), 2005, 
EntreMundos/AmongWorlds: New
Perspectives on Gloria E. Anzaldúa
, New York: Palgrave
Macmillan. doi:10.1057/9781403977137


Khader, Serene J., 2011, 
Adaptive Preferences and
Women’s Empowerment
, (Studies in Feminist Philosophy),
Oxford/New York: Oxford University Press.
doi:10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199777884.001.0001


–––, 2019, 
Decolonizing Universalism: A
Transnational Feminist Ethic
, (Studies in Feminist Philosophy),
New York: Oxford University Press.
doi:10.1093/oso/9780190664190.001.0001


Kittay, Eva Feder, 1999, 
Love’s Labor: Essays on Women,
Equality, and Dependency
, (Thinking Gender), New York:
Routledge.


–––, 2002, “When Caring Is Just and
Justice Is Caring: Justice and Mental Retardation”, in Kittay
and Feder 2002: 257–276.


Kittay, Eva Feder and Licia Carlson (eds), 2010, 
Cognitive
Disability and Its Challenge to Moral Philosophy
, Malden, MA:
Wiley-Blackwell. doi:10.1002/9781444322781


Kittay, Eva Feder and Ellen K. Feder (eds), 2002, 
The Subject
of Care: Feminist Perspectives on Dependency
, (Feminist
Constructions), Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield Publishers.


Koggel, Christine M., 1998, 
Perspectives on Equality:
Constructing a Relational Theory
, Lanham, MD: Rowman &
Littlefield Publishers.


Koyama, Emi, 2001, “The Transfeminist Manifest”,
collected in 
Whose Feminism is it Anyway? And Other Essays from
the Third Wave
, Portland, OR: Confluere Publications, 2004,
11–20.
 [
Koyama 2001 available online
]


Kramer, Sina, 2017, 
Excluded Within: The (Un)Intelligibility
of Radical Political Actors
, New York: Oxford University Press.
doi:10.1093/oso/9780190625986.001.0001


Krause, Sharon R., 2008, 
Civil Passions: Moral Sentiment and
Democratic Deliberation
, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
Press.


–––, 2011, “Contested Questions, Current
Trajectories: Feminism in Political Theory Today”, 
Politics
& Gender
, 7(1): 105–111.
doi:10.1017/S1743923X10000607


Kristeva, Julia, 1974 [1984], 
La revolution du langage
poetique: l’avant-garde a la fin du XIXe siecle:
Lautréamont et Mallarmé
, (Collection Tel Quel),
Paris: Seuil. Translated as 
Revolution in Poetic Language
,
Margaret Waller (trans.), New York: Columbia University Press,
1984.


–––, 1979 [1981], “Le temps des
femmes”, 
Cahiers de recherche de sciences des textes et
documents
, 34/44(5): 5–19. Translated as, 1981,
“Women’s Time”, Alice Jardine and Harry Blake
(trans.), 
Signs: Journal of Women in Culture and Society
,
7(1): 13–35. Reprinted in, 1986, 
The Kristeva Reader
,
Toril Moi (ed.), New York: Columbia University Press, 187–213
(ch. 8). doi:10.1086/493855


–––, 1980a, 
Desire in Language: A Semiotic
Approach to Literature and Art
, Leon S. Roudiez (ed.), Thomas
Gora, Alice Jardine, and Leon S. Roudiez (trans), New York: Columbia
Univ. Press.


–––, 1980b [1982], 
Pouvoirs de
l’horreur: essai sur l’abjection
, (Collection Tel
quel), Paris: Éditions du Seuil. Translated as 
Powers of
Horror: An Essay on Abjection
, Leon S. Roudiez (trans.),
(European Perspectives), New York: Columbia University Press,
1982.


Laclau, Ernesto and Chantal Mouffe, 1985, 
Hegemony and
Socialist Strategy: Towards a Radical Democratic Politics
,
London: Verso.


Lloyd, Genevieve, 1984 [1993], 
The Man of Reason:
“Male” and “Female” in Western
Philosophy
, Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press.
Second edition, New York: Routledge, 1993.


Lorde, Audre, 1984, 
Sister Outsider: Essays and Speeches
,
(Crossing Press Feminist Series), Freedom, CA: Crossing Press.


Love, Heather, 2007, 
Feeling Backward: Loss and the Politics
of Queer History
, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.


Lugones, María C., 1995, “Playfulness,
‘World’-Traveling, and Loving Perception”, in

Free Spirits: Feminist Philosophers on Culture
, Kate Mehuron
and Gary Percesepe (eds), Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall,
121–128.


–––, 2003, 
Pilgrimages/Peregrinajes:
Theorizing Coalition Against Multiple Oppression
, Lanham, MD:
Rowman & Littlefield.


–––, 2005, “From within Germinative
Stasis: Creating Active Subjectivity, Resistant Agency”, in

EntreMundos/AmongWorlds: New Perspectives on Gloria E.
Anzaldúa
, AnaLouise Keating (ed.), New York: Palgrave
Macmillan US, 85–99. , doi:10.1057/9781403977137_9


–––, 2007, “Heterosexualism and the
Colonial/Modern Gender System”, 
Hypatia
, 22(1):
186–219. doi:10.1111/j.1527-2001.2007.tb01156.x


–––, 2010, “Toward a Decolonial
Feminism”, 
Hypatia
, 25(4): 742–759.
doi:10.1111/j.1527-2001.2010.01137.x


Lugones, María C. and Elizabeth Spelman, 1986, “Have
We Got a Theory for You! Feminist Theory, Cultural Imperialism and the
Demand for ‘The Woman’s Voice’”, in 
Women
and Values: Readings in Recent Feminist Philosophy
, Marilyn
Pearsall (ed.), Belmont, Calif.: Wadsworth Publishing Company, pp.
19–31.


MacKinnon, Catharine A., 1987, 
Feminism Unmodified: Discourses
on Life and Law
, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.


–––, 1989, 
Toward a Feminist Theory of the
State
, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.


Mahmood, Saba, 2005, 
Politics of Piety: The Islamic Revival
and the Feminist Subject
, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
Press.


Malabou, Catherine and Ewa Plonowska Ziarek, 2012,
“Negativity, Unhappiness or Felicity: On Irigaray’s
Dialectical Culture of Sexual Difference”, 
L’Esprit
Créateur
, 52(3): 11–25.
doi:10.1353/esp.2012.0035


Malatino, Hil, 2020, 
Trans Care
, Minneapolis, MN:
University of Minnesota Press.


Maldonado Torres, Nelson, 2008, 
Against War: Views from the
Underside of Modernity
, (Latin America Otherwise :
Languages, Empires, Nations), Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
doi:10.1215/9780822388999


Mariotti, Shannon, 2020, “Zen and the Art of Democracy:
Contemplative Practice as Ordinary Political Theory”,

Political Theory
, 48(4): 469–495.
doi:10.1177/0090591719887224


Marx, Karl, 1845, “Thesen über Feuerbach”,
written 1845. Translated as “Theses on Feuerbach” in Karl
Marx and Friedrich Engels, 1998, 
The German Ideology: Including
Theses on Feuerbach and Introduction to The Critique of Political
Economy
, Amherst, MA: Prometheus Books.


Matsuda, Mari J., 1986, “Liberal Jurisprudence and
Abstracted Visions of Human Nature: A Feminist Critique of
Rawls’ Theory of Justice”, 
New Mexico Law Review
,
16(3): 613–630.


–––, 1996, 
Where is Your Body? And Other
Essays on Race, Gender, and the Law
, Boston, MA: Beacon
Press.


McAfee, Noëlle, 2000, 
Habermas, Kristeva, and
Citizenship
, Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.


–––, 2004, “Three Models of Democratic
Deliberation”, 
The Journal of Speculative Philosophy
,
18(1): 44–59. doi:10.1353/jsp.2004.0007


–––, 2008, 
Democracy and the Political
Unconscious
, New York: Columbia University Press.


–––, 2019, 
Fear of Breakdown: Politics and
Psychoanalysis
, New York: Columbia University Press.


McAfee, Noëlle and R. Claire Snyder, 2007, “Feminist
Engagements in Democratic Theory”, 
Hypatia
, 22(4):
vii–x. doi:10.1111/j.1527-2001.2007.tb01315.x


Mignolo, Walter D., 2000, 
Local Histories/Global Designs:
Coloniality, Subaltern Knowledges, and Border Thinking
,
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.


Millett, Kate, 1970, 
Sexual Politics
, Garden City, NY:
Doubleday.


Mohanty, Chandra Talpade, 1991, “Under Western Eyes:
Feminist Scholarship and Colonial Discourses”, in Mohanty et al.
(eds.) 1991: 51–80.


–––, 2003, 
Feminism without Borders:
Decolonizing Theory, Practicing Solidarity
, Durham, NC: Duke
University Press. doi:10.1215/9780822384649


Mohanty, Chandra Talpade, Ann Russo, and Lourdes Torres (eds),
1991, 
Third World Women and the Politics of Feminism
,
Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press.


Montford, Kelly Struthers and Chloë Taylor (eds), 2022,

Building Abolition: Decarceration and Social Justice
,
(Routledge Studies in Penal Abolition and Transformative Justice
Series), Abingdon, Oxon/New York: Routledge.
doi:10.4324/9780429329173


Moraga, Cherríe and Gloria Anzaldúa (eds), 1981
[2015], 
This Bridge Called My Back: Writings by Radical Women of
Color
, Watertown, MA: Persephone Press. Fourth edition, Albany,
NY: SUNY Press, 2015.


Moreton-Robinson, Aileen, 2000, 
Talkin’ up to the White
Woman: Indigenous Women and White Feminism
, St Lucia, Qld:
University of Queensland Press.


Morgan, Robin (ed.), 1970, 
Sisterhood Is Powerful: An
Anthology of Writings from the Women’s Liberation Movement
,
New York: Random House.


Mouffe, Chantal (ed.), 1979, 
Gramsci and Marxist Theory
,
London/Boston: Routledge & Kegan Paul.


––– (ed.), 1992a, 
Dimensions of Radical
Democracy: Pluralism, Citizenship, Community
, (Phronesis),
London/New York: Verso.


–––, 1992b, “Feminism, Citizenship and
Radical Democratic Politics”, in Butler and Scott 1992:
369–384 (ch. 17).


–––, 1993, 
The Return of the Political
,
London: Verso.


–––, 1999, 
The Challenge of Carl
Schmitt
, London: Verso.


–––, 2000, 
The Democratic Paradox
,
London: Verso.


–––, 2005, 
On the Political
, (Thinking
in Action), London/New York: Routledge. doi:10.4324/9780203870112


Nash, Jennifer C., 2019, 
Black Feminism Reimagined: After
Intersectionality
, (Next Wave : New Directions in
Women’s Studies), Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
doi:10.1215/9781478002253


Nash, Kate, 1998, “Beyond Liberalism? Feminist Theories of
Democracy”, in 
Gender, Politics and the State
, Vicky
Randall and Georgina Waylen (eds), New York: Routledge, 45–57.
doi:10.4324/9780203004890


Narayan, Uma, 1997, 
Dislocating Cultures: Identities,
Traditions, and Third-World Feminism
, (Thinking Gender), New
York: Routledge. doi:10.4324/9780203707487


Narayan, Uma and Sandra Harding (eds), 2000, 
Decentering the
Center: Philosophy for a Multicultural, Postcolonial, and Feminist
World
, Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press.


Nedelsky, Jennifer, 2005, 
Law, Autonomy, and the Relational
Self: A Feminist Revisioning of the Foundations of Law, 
Oxford:
Oxford University Press.


Nussbaum, Martha C., 1995, “Human Capabilities, Female Human
Beings”, in 
Women, Culture, and Development: A Study of
Human Capabilities
, Martha C. Nussbaum and Jonathan Glover (eds),
Oxford: Clarendon Press, 61–104.
doi:10.1093/0198289642.003.0003


–––, 1999a, 
Sex and Social Justice
, New
York: Oxford University Press.


–––, 1999b, “The Professor of
Parody”, 
New Republic
, 22 February 1999, pp.
37–45.


–––, 2000, 
Women and Human Development: The
Capabilities Approach
, (The John Robert Seeley Lectures),
Cambridge/New York: Cambridge University Press.


–––, 2001, 
Upheavals of Thought: The
Intelligence of Emotions
, Cambridge/New York: Cambridge
University Press. doi:10.1017/CBO9780511840715


–––, 2004, “The Future of Feminist
Liberalism”, in 
Setting the Moral Compass: Essays By Women
Philosophers
, Cheshire Calhoun (ed.), New York: Oxford University
Press, 72–88. doi:10.1093/oso/9780195154740.003.0005


–––, 2006, 
Frontiers of Justice: Disability,
Nationality, Species Membership
, (The Tanner Lectures on Human
Values), Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press of Harvard University
Press.


–––, 2013, 
Political Emotions: Why Love
Matters for Justice
, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press.


–––, 2018, 
The Monarchy of Fear: A
Philosopher Looks at Our Political Crisis
, New York: Simon &
Schuster.


–––, 2022, 
Justice for Animals: Our
Collective Responsibility
, New York: Simon & Schuster.


Okin, Susan Moller, 1979, 
Women in Western Political
Thought
, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.


–––, 1989, 
Justice, Gender, and the
Family
, New York: Basic Books.


–––, 1998, “Political Philosophy: Feminism
and Political Theory”, in 
Philosophy in a Feminist Voice:
Critiques and Reconstructions
, Janet A. Kourany (ed.), Princeton,
NJ: Princeton University Press, 116–144.
doi:10.1515/9781400822324.116


–––, 1999, 
Is Multiculturalism Bad for
Women?
, with respondents, Joshua Cohen, Matthew Howard, and
Martha C. Nussbaum (eds), Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
Press.


Ortega, Mariana, 2016, 
In-Between: Latina Feminist
Phenomenology, Multiplicity, and the Self
, Albany, NY: SUNY
Press.


Oyěwùmí, Oyèrónkẹ́,
1997, 
The Invention of Women: Making an African Sense of Western
Gender Discourses
, Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota
Press.


Pateman, Carole, 1988, 
The Sexual Contract
, Cambridge,
UK: Polity.


–––, 1989, 
The Disorder of Women: Democracy,
Feminism and Political Theory
, Stanford, CA: Stanford University
Press.


Pateman, Carole and Charles W. Mills, 2007, 
Contract and
Domination
, Cambridge, UK/Malden, MA: Polity.


Phelan, Shane, 1994, 
Getting Specific: Postmodern Lesbian
Politics
, Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press.


Phillips, Anne, 1993, 
Democracy and Difference
,
Cambridge, UK: Polity Press.


–––, 1995, 
The Politics of Presence
,
Oxford/New York: Oxford University Press.


––– (ed.), 1998, 
Feminism and Politics
,
New York: Oxford University Press.


–––, 2009, 
Multiculturalism without
Culture
, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.


Pitts, Andrea J., 2021a, 
Nos/Otras: Gloria E. Anzaldúa,
Multiplicitous Agency, and Resistance
, (SUNY Series, Philosophy
and Race), Albany, NY: State University of New York Press.


–––, 2021b, “Challenging the Carceral
Imaginary in a Digital Age: Epistemic Asymmetries and the Right to Be
Forgotten”, 
Las Torres de Lucca. International Journal of
Political Philosophy
, 10(19): 3–14.
doi:10.5209/ltdl.76459


Povinelli, Elizabeth A., 2011, 
Economies of Abandonment:
Social Belonging and Endurance in Late Liberalism
, Durham, NC:
Duke University Press. doi:10.1215/9780822394570


Puar, Jasbir K., 2017, 
The Right to Maim: Debility, Capacity,
Disability
, (Anima), Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
doi:10.1215/9780822372530


Quijano, Anibal, 2000, “Coloniality of Power, Eurocentrism,
and Latin America”, 
Nepantla: Views from South
, 1(3):
533–580.


Rawls, John, 1971, 
A Theory of Justice
, Cambridge, MA:
Belknap Press of Harvard University Press.


–––, 1993, 
Political Liberalism
, (The
John Dewey Essays in Philosophy 4), New York: Columbia University
Press.


Ricœur, Paul, 1970, 
Freud and Philosophy: An Essay on
Interpretation
, (Terry Lectures), New Haven, CT: Yale University
Press.


Rubin, Gayle, 1975, “The Traffic in Women: Notes on the
‘Political Economy’ of Sex”, in 
Toward an
Anthropology of Women
, Rayna R. Reiter (ed.), New York: Monthly
Review Press, 157–210.


Schutte, Ofelia, 2002, “Dependency Work, Women, and the
Global Economy”, in Kittay and Feder 2002: 138–159.


Scott, Joan Wallach, 1988a, “Gender: A Useful Category of
Historical Analysis”, in her 
Gender and the Politics of
History
, (Gender and Culture), New York: Columbia University
Press, 28–52.


–––, 1988b, “Deconstructing
Equality-versus-Difference: Or, the Uses of Poststructuralist Theory
for Feminism”, 
Feminist Studies
, 14(1): 32–50.
doi:10.2307/3177997


–––, 1992,
“‘Experience’”, in Butler and Scott 1992:
22–40.


–––, 2007, 
The Politics of the Veil
,
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.


–––, 2011, 
The Fantasy of Feminist
History
, (Next Wave Provocations), Durham, NC: Duke University
Press. doi:10.1215/9780822394730


Sheth, Falguni A., 2022, 
Unruly Women: Race, Neocolonialism,
and the Hijab
, (Philosophy of Race Series), New York: Oxford
University Press. doi:10.1093/oso/9780197547137.001.0001


Sigler, Robert T. and Donna Haygood, 1988, “The
Criminalization of Forced Marital Intercourse”, 
Marriage
& Family Review
, 12(1–2): 71–85.
doi:10.1300/J002v12n01_04


Simpson, Audra, 2014, 
Mohawk Interruptus: Political Life
across the Borders of Settler States
, Durham, NC/London: Duke
University Press. doi:10.1215/9780822376781


Simpson, Leanne Betasamosake, 2017, 
As We Have Always Done:
Indigenous Freedom through Radical Resistance
, (Indigenous
Americas), Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press.


Snyder, R. Claire, 2008, “What Is Third‐Wave Feminism?
A New Directions Essay”, 
Signs: Journal of Women in Culture
and Society
, 34(1): 175–196. doi:10.1086/588436


Song, Sarah, 2007, 
Justice, Gender, and the Politics of
Multiculturalism
, (Contemporary Political Theory), Cambridge/New
York: Cambridge University Press. doi:10.1017/CBO9780511490354


Spelman, Elizabeth V., 1989, “Anger and
Insubordination”, in 
Women, Knowledge, and Reality:
Explorations in Feminist Philosophy
, Ann Garry and Marilyn
Pearsall (eds), Boston: Unwin Hyman, 263–274.


–––, 1991, “The Virtue of Feeling and the
Feeling of Virtue”, in 
Feminist Ethics
, Claudia Card
(ed.), Lawrence, KS: University Press of Kansas, 213–232 (ch.
13).


Spivak, Gayatri Chakravorty, 1987, 
In Other Worlds: Essays in
Cultural Politics
, New York: Methuen.
doi:10.4324/9780203441114


–––, 1988, “Can the Subaltern
Speak?”, in 
Marxism and the Interpretation of Culture
,
Cary Nelson and Lawrence Grossberg (eds), Urbana, IL: University of
Illinois Press, 271–313. A revised version was in
“History” in her 
A Critique of Postcolonial Reason:
Toward a History of the Vanishing Present
, Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press, 1999. This in turn was in 
Can the Subaltern
Speak? Reflections on the History of an Idea
, Rosalind C. Morris
(ed.), New York: Columbia University Press, 2010, 21–78.


Taylor, Keeanga-Yamahtta, 2016, 
From #BlackLivesMatter to
Black Liberation
, Chicago, IL: Haymarket.


––– (ed.), 2017, 
How We Get Free: Black
Feminism and the Combahee River Collective
, Chicago, IL:
Haymarket.


Threadcraft, Shatema, 2016, 
Intimate Justice: The Black Female
Body and the Body Politic, 
Oxford: Oxford University Press.


Tronto, Joan C., 1993, 
Moral Boundaries: A Political Argument
for an Ethic of Care
, New York/London: Routledge.
doi:10.4324/9781003070672


–––, 2013, 
Caring Democracy: Markets,
Equality, and Justice
, New York: New York University Press.


Vergès, Françoise, 2019 [2021], 
Un
féminisme décolonial
, Paris: La Fabrique
éditions. Translated as 
A Decolonial Feminism
, Ashley
J. Bohrer (trans.), London: Pluto Press, 2021.


Vogel, Lise, 1983, 
Marxism and the Oppression of Women: Toward
a Unitary Theory
, New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University
Press.


Walia, Harsha, 2013, 
Undoing Border Imperialism
,
(Anarchist Intervention Series 6), Oakland, CA: AK Press.


Watson, Lori and Jessica Flanigan, 2020, 
Debating Sex
Work
, (Debating Ethics), New York: Oxford University Press.
doi:10.1093/oso/9780190659882.001.0001


Weeks, Kathi, 1998, 
Constituting Feminist Subjects
,
Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.


Welch, Shay, 2015, 
Existential Eroticism: A Feminist Approach
to Understanding Women’s Oppression-Perpetuating Choices
,
Lanham, MD: Lexington Books.


Whisnant, Rebecca, 2016, “Our Blood: Andrea Dworkin on Race,
Privilege, and Women’s Common Condition”,

Women’s Studies International Forum
, 58: 68–76.
doi:10.1016/j.wsif.2016.07.004


Williams, Patricia J., 1991, 
The Alchemy of Race and
Rights
, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.


Wynter, Sylvia, 2003, “Unsettling the Coloniality of
Being/Power/Truth/Freedom: Towards the Human, After Man, Its
Overrepresentation—An Argument”, 
CR: The New
Centennial Review
, 3(3): 257–337.
doi:10.1353/ncr.2004.0015


Yeatman, Anna, 1994, 
Postmodern Revisionings of the
Political
, New York/London: Routledge.
doi:10.4324/9781315831916


–––, 2001, “Feminism and
Citizenship”, in 
Culture and Citizenship
, Nick
Stevenson (ed.), London: Sage Publications, 138–152 (ch. 9).
doi:10.4135/9781446217665.n9


Young, Iris Marion, 1990, 
Justice and the Politics of
Difference
, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.


–––, 1997, 
Intersecting Voices: Dilemmas of
Gender, Political Philosophy, and Policy
, Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press.


–––, 2000, 
Inclusion and Democracy
,
(Oxford Political Theory), Oxford/New York: Oxford University Press.
doi:10.1093/0198297556.001.0001


Zerilli, Linda M. G., 2005, 
Feminism and the Abyss of
Freedom
, Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.


–––, 2009, “Toward a Feminist Theory of
Judgment”, 
Signs: Journal of Women in Culture and
Society
, 34(2): 295–317. doi:10.1086/591090


–––, 2012, “Value Pluralism and the
Problem of Judgment: Farewell to Public Reason”, 
Political
Theory
, 40(1): 6–31. doi:10.1177/0090591711426853


–––, 2016, 
A Democratic Theory of
Judgment
, Chicago/London: University of Chicago Press.


Ziarek, Ewa Płonowska, 2001, 
An Ethics of Dissensus:
Postmodernity, Feminism, and the Politics of Radical Democracy
,
Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.


–––, 2012, 
Feminist Aesthetics and the
Politics of Modernism
, New York: Columbia University Press.


Zurn, Perry, 2021, “Prisons”, in 
The Oxford
Handbook of Feminist Philosophy
, Kim Q. Hall and Ásta
(eds), Oxford: Oxford University Press, 440–450 (ch. 36).
doi:10.1093/oxfordhb/9780190628925.013.35


Zurn, Perry and Andrew Dilts (eds), 2016, 
Active Intolerance:
Michel Foucault, the Prisons Information Group, and the Future of
Abolition
, New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
doi:10.1057/9781137510679








Academic Tools










How to cite this entry
.








Preview the PDF version of this entry
 at the
 
Friends of the SEP Society
.








Look up topics and thinkers related to this entry

 at the Internet Philosophy Ontology Project (InPhO).








Enhanced bibliography for this entry

at 
PhilPapers
, with links to its database.












Other Internet Resources



[Please contact the author with suggestions.]






Related Entries




affirmative action
 |
 
Arendt, Hannah
 |
 
colonialism
 |
 
democracy
 |
 
Dewey, John: political philosophy
 |
 
discrimination
 |
 
equality
 |
 
exploitation
 |
 
feminist philosophy
 |
 
feminist philosophy, approaches: Latin American feminism
 |
 
feminist philosophy, interventions: environmental philosophy
 |
 
feminist philosophy, interventions: ethics
 |
 
feminist philosophy, interventions: history of philosophy
 |
 
feminist philosophy, interventions: liberal feminism
 |
 
feminist philosophy, interventions: philosophy of law
 |
 
feminist philosophy, topics: perspectives on autonomy
 |
 
feminist philosophy, topics: perspectives on class and work
 |
 
feminist philosophy, topics: perspectives on disability
 |
 
feminist philosophy, topics: perspectives on globalization
 |
 
feminist philosophy, topics: perspectives on power
 |
 
feminist philosophy, topics: perspectives on sex and gender
 |
 
feminist philosophy, topics: perspectives on the self
 |
 
Foucault, Michel
 |
 
globalization
 |
 
Habermas, Jürgen
 |
 
homosexuality
 |
 
identity politics
 |
 
legal rights
 |
 
liberalism
 |
 
Rawls, John
 |
 
representation, political










 






Copyright © 2023
 by




Noëlle McAfee

<
noelle
.
c
.
mcafee
@
emory
.
edu
>

Katie B. Howard
<
khowar19
@
calstatela
.
edu
>
    




 









  Open access to the SEP is made possible by a world-wide funding initiative.

  Please Read How You Can Help Support the Growth and Development of the Encyclopedia




 

