











 
 Entry Navigation 






Entry Contents


Bibliography


Academic Tools


Friends PDF Preview 


Author and Citation Info 
 


Back to Top 


























Fictionalism
First published Fri Mar 30, 2007; substantive revision Wed Mar 6, 2024





Fictionalism about a region of discourse can provisionally be
characterized as the view that claims made within that discourse are
not best seen as aiming at literal truth but are better regarded as a
sort of ‘fiction’. As we will see, this first
characterization of fictionalism is in several ways rough. But it is a
useful point of departure.



This entry is divided into five main sections. The first section
contains a brief history and overview of fictionalist views. The
second section describes more carefully what different kinds of
fictionalist theses there are. In the third and fourth sections,
important arguments for and against fictionalism are summarized. The
fifth section is devoted to a more general discussion of the
philosophical significance of fictionalism.








1. Brief History and Overview


2. Some Qualifications and Distinctions




2.1 Language and ontology


2.2 Hermeneutic and revolutionary fictionalism


2.3 Meaning versus use


2.4 Attitudes




3. Arguments for Fictionalism




3.1 Via eliminativist antirealism


3.2 The Oracle


3.3 The paradox of existence


3.4 Analogies with uncontroversially non-literal discourse




4. Arguments against Fictionalism




4.1 The phenomenological objection


4.2 Can fictionalism deliver the goods?


4.3 Criticisms concerning systematicity


4.4 The fictionalist’s preferred analogies


4.5 Philosophy of language concerns


4.6 Old problems in new bottles?


4.7 Other objections




5. Significance


Bibliography


Academic Tools


Other Internet Resources


Related Entries










1. Brief History and Overview



Some historically especially important precursors to modern
fictionalism are Jeremy Bentham (see Ogden 1932), who defended the
view that many entities referred to in ordinary discourse are
“fictitious”, Hans Vaihinger, with his philosophy of the
“as if”, and, specifically in the moral case, Friedrich
Nietzsche, whose view has been argued to amount to moral fictionalism.
Voltaire’s famous “If God did not exist, it would be
necessary to invent him” can be seen as expressing a
fictionalist stance toward theism. Moreover, George Berkeley’s
advice to think with the learned and speak with the vulgar is often
taken to express a fictionalist stance (from §51 of 
A
Treatise Concerning the Principles of Human Knowledge
, defending
his immaterialism from the charge that it does not fit the way we
speak). Sometimes Hume is mentioned as an early fictionalist (see for
example Varzi 2013). There are arguably earlier predecessors as well.
One possible example is the Pyrrhonist view that we should live
without belief (see Sextus Empiricus, “Outlines of
Scepticism”). Moreover, the doctrine of the two truths in
Buddhist philosophy has been interpreted as a distinction between
fictional truth and real truth (see Garfield 2006). Pierre Duhem
(1913) argues that the dominant view on astronomy before the advent of
modern physics was that a fictionalist attitude was appropriate. For
some discussion of these historical precursors, see Gideon Rosen
(2005) (for a discussion of Pyrrhonism, the early history of
astronomy, and Bentham), Arthur Fine (1993) (for a discussion of
Vaihinger), and Nadeem Hussain (2007) (for a discussion of Nietzsche
and other 19th century German philosophers with fictionalist
tendencies).



More recently, Hartry Field (1980 and 1989), Joseph Melia (e.g. 2000),
Mark Balaguer (e.g. 1998a) and Stephen Yablo (see especially 2000a,
2000b, 2001 and 2002) have defended fictionalism about mathematical
discourse (see here the entry on
 
fictionalism in the philosophy of mathematics
);
 Bas van Fraassen (1980) has defended a version of fictionalism about
scientific theories; Richard Joyce (2001, 2005, forthcoming), Mark
Kalderon (2005a) and Daniel Nolan, Greg Restall and Caroline West
(2005) have defended moral fictionalism; Kendall Walton (1985, 1990 ,
2000), Mark Crimmins (1998), Stuart Brock (2002), Mark Balaguer
(1998b), Anthony Everett (2005), Frederick Kroon (2000, 2004) and
Stefano Predelli (2020) have defended fictionalism about things like
negative existentials, identity statements, propositional attitude
reports, fictional characters and fictional discourse; Peter van
Inwagen (1990) and Cian Dorr and Gideon Rosen (2002) have defended
fictionalism about ordinary object discourse; Bradley Armour-Garb and
James Woodbridge (2015) and Alexis Burgess and John Burgess (2011)
have defended fictionalism about truth; and D.M. Armstrong (1989),
Gideon Rosen (1990), John Nolt (1986), and Seahwa Kim (2005) have
defended modal fictionalism (see here the entry on
 
modal fictionalism
).
 Religious fictionalism is discussed in LePoidevin (2016, 2019) and
the essays in Joyce and Kroon (forthcoming) compare moral and
religious fictionalism. In recent years, mental fictionalism has
become the subject of much discussion. See here the essays in Tamas
Demeter, Ted Parent and Adam Toon (2022) as well as Adam Toon’s
(2023). Sam Baron, Kristie Miller and Jonathan Tallant (2021) defend
fictionalism about temporal thought. Naomi Thompon (2022) puts forward
and motivates fictionalism about grounding. Heather Logue (2022)
defends gender fictionalism. Needless to say, this is a just a sample
of recent defenses of fictionalist views.



The present entry will be more focused on fictionalism as a general
strategy in philosophy than on fictionalism about specific discourses.
For some recent overviews of fictionalism, see Kroon (2011),
Emily Caddick Bourne (2013), John Divers and David Liggins
(2005), Mark Sainsbury (2010), Lukas Skiba and Richard Woodward
(2020), and the full-length book on fictionalism by Frederick Kroon,
Jonathan McKeown-Green and Stuart Brock (2018). Important collections
of texts on fictionalism are Mark Eli Kalderon (2005b) and Bradley
Armour-Garb and Frederick Kroon (2020).


2. Some Qualifications and Distinctions



The earlier provisional characterization of fictionalism needs
qualification and supplementation. In this section, more precision
will be provided.


2.1 Language and ontology



A first crucial distinction is between a 
linguistic
 and an

ontological
 thesis. The linguistic thesis is, roughly, that
already expressed above, according to which utterances of sentences of
the discourse are best seen not as efforts to say what is literally
true, but as useful fictions of some sort. The ontological thesis, by
contrast, is the thesis that the entities characteristic of the
discourse do not exist, or have the ontological status of fictional
entities. One can in principle embrace the linguistic thesis without
embracing the ontological thesis, and vice versa. Both the provisional
statement of fictionalism and the statements of these two theses
mention fiction, and the thesis discussed is called
“fictionalism”. But as we will see, not all theses that
tend to go under the heading fictionalism relate very clearly to
fiction in any ordinary sense.



Often the linguistic and the ontological thesis are run together.
Nolan, Restall and West (2005) say, when introducing fictionalism,
“The simplest fictionalist approach to a discourse takes certain
claims in that discourse to be literally false, but nevertheless worth
uttering in certain contexts, since the pretence that such claims are
true is worthwhile for various theoretical purposes”. (A
complication that they introduce is that some fictionalists may simply
be 
agnostic
 about the relevant claims.) Zoltán Gendler
Szabó (2001) says, “To be a fictionalist about

F
s is to think that our naïve attitude toward

F
-discourse is only halfway correct: we are right in thinking
that we use genuine singular terms that purport to refer to

F
s, but wrong in thinking that they actually succeed in
referring. In engaging in 
F
-discourse we inadvertently slip
into fictional talk”. One reason that the linguistic and
ontological theses are often run together is that the linguistic
thesis tends to be motivated by ontological concerns. For example,
someone who is a nominalist might on that ground find herself
attracted to fictionalism about mathematical discourse.



The focus in this entry will primarily be on the linguistic thesis.
The ontological thesis might be held also by someone who holds that we
are better off simply abandoning or rejecting the target discourse,
and that is not a distinctively fictionalist thesis.


2.2 Hermeneutic and revolutionary fictionalism



A second distinction is between 
hermeneutic
 and

revolutionary

 fictionalism.
[
1
]

 Hermeneutic fictionalism about a discourse 
D
 is a thesis
about the actual nature of the discourse: according to hermeneutic
fictionalism we actually do not aim at the literal truth but only
appear to or pretend to do so. Revolutionary fictionalism, by
contrast, insists that when engaging in 
D
 we 
ought

not to aim at the literal truth; the point of engaging in

D
 can be achieved by other, preferable means.
Obviously, hermeneutic and revolutionary fictionalism are different
theses and must be evaluated separately. The rest of the discussion
in section 2 will focus primarily on hermeneutic fictionalism. 
It should be straightforward to see how the points generalize
to revolutionary fictionalism.


2.3 Meaning versus use



Most hermeneutic fictionalists about some particular discourse hold
that although we normally utter sentences within the discourse in a
fictional spirit, we could, and perhaps sometimes do, use these
sentences literally. For example, a mathematical fictionalist might
hold that when we utter “there are prime numbers” in
ordinary contexts we mean this in a fictional spirit, but add that
when we utter this sentence in the philosophy room we sometimes intend
to speak literally. But one can at least imagine a different kind of
hermeneutic fictionalism. Take the case of discourse about fictional
characters. A name like ‘SpongeBob’ is first introduced
for the purposes of story telling and for making claims internal to
the story; for example, the claim that SpongeBob lives in a pineapple
under the sea. But there is disagreement about the proper account of
the use of names of fictional entities in extrafictive,
non-story-telling contexts, e.g. in “SpongeBob is a better role
model than Superman”. Some philosophers hold that this
‘extrafictive’ use of fictional names shows that
‘SpongeBob’ has a reference outside the fiction (for
example, that it refers to an abstract entity). Others hold that while
‘SpongeBob’ can be used meaningfully in such contexts, it
is nonetheless, in such contexts, a mere non-referring empty name,
alongside ‘Zeus’ and ‘Vulcan’. One can imagine
a third kind of view, according to which names of fictional characters
are, as it were, only meaningful inside the fiction. Anyone attracted
to such a view must tell some special story about seeming extrafictive
truths (see Brock 2002). Similarly, and returning to fictionalism, one
can imagine a fictionalist about some discourse who denies that the
relevant sentences even can be meaningfully used outside the fiction;
who holds that the sentences only have fiction uses.



The view may sound farfetched. But Yablo (1998) comes close to
suggesting a view of this sort when he says, after having motivated
fictionalism about the use of names of cities, that he does not know
what it would be to use “Chicago exists” more literally
than he already does. Let us call the fictionalism according to which
there is a literal use of the sentences in question with which the
ordinary use contrasts 
use fictionalism
; call the other

meaning fictionalism
. The distinction may correspond to
Armour-Garb and Woodbridge’s (2015) distinction between

extrinsic
 and 
intrinsic
 pretense. Armour-Garb and
Woodbridge say that what characterizes extrinsic pretense is that we

could
 take the utterance made literally, whereas in cases of
intrinsic pretense, “the pretense is integral to the utterance
saying anything at all”. Use fictionalism is arguably by far the
more common doctrine. But it is worth mentioning meaning fictionalism
as well, both because some fictionalists appear to endorse it, and
because the distinction will be relevant to some of the arguments
against fictionalism. Armour-Garb and Woodbridge call their own brand
of fictionalism semantic and oppose what they call pragmatic
accounts.



There are further distinctions to draw between different kinds of
fictionalism. Following Yablo (2001), one can distinguish between the
following fictionalist views (about discourse about 
X
s):





Instrumentalism: the speaker is not “really” asserting
anything, only pretending to do so.



Meta-fictionalism: the speaker is “really” asserting that
according to a certain fiction, the 
X
s are so and so.



Object-fictionalism: the speaker is “really” asserting
that the world is in a certain condition, namely, the condition it
needs to be in to make it true in the relevant fiction that the

X
s are so and so.



Figuralism: the speaker is “really” asserting that

something
 is in a certain condition, but perhaps not the
world; the 
X
s are functioning as representational aids in a
figurative description of the 
Y
s, where the 
Y
s may
themselves be representational aids invoked to help us describe still
further
 objects.
[
3
]





The characterizations are abstract. An example might help. Let us take
number discourse as our example, and consider these fictionalist views
as applied to number discourse. The instrumentalist says that in an
utterance of “the number of apples is two”, the speaker is
merely pretending to assert something; nothing is really asserted. The
instrumentalist does not present an alternative account of what the
speaker is doing. The metafictionalist says that something is asserted
along the lines of: according to the number fiction, the number of
apples is two. The object fictionalist says that what is asserted is
something non-number-involving about the real world — something
which would make it true in the fiction that the number of apples is
two: that there is an apple 
x
 and an apple 
y
 such
that 
x
 and 
y
 are distinct and nothing distinct from
both 
x
 and 
y
 is an apple. The characteristic objects
of the discourse, the numbers, are mere aids we use to make utterances
about how things stand in the real world. Yablo’s own preferred
view, figuralism, is supposed to be a close cousin of object
fictionalism, but with an added twist. Figuralism does not differ from
object fictionalism in what it says about the example used so far. The
differences only show up when we are considering utterances
intuitively about these props themselves, the numbers, such as
“7 is smaller than 11”. Sometimes, Yablo says, numbers
— and other props — are used as mere representational
aids, but sometimes they also function as things represented. (He
provides as a comparison “pinpricks of conscience register less
than pangs of conscience.”) In a typical utterance of “the
number of apples is two”, the number functions as a
representational aid. But in “there are numbers” as used
by the platonist, numbers function as things represented. And in
“the number of even primes is zero”, as a nominalist can
be envisaged to use it when doing philosophy, saying something that
given her philosophical views is true, they function both as
representational aids (“number”) and as things represented
(“even prime”). (Compare also the catalogue of
fictionalist views in Kalderon 2005a, ch. 3.)



A broader distinction is that between what can be called 
content
fictionalism
 and 
force fictionalism
. The content
fictionalist holds that in (ordinary) utterances of sentences of

D
 some content is asserted, but what is asserted is something
other than their literal content. The force fictionalist holds that
the content expressed in an (ordinary) utterance of a sentence of

D
 is not asserted: instead some other speech act is
performed. Instrumentalism is a form of force fictionalism. The other
forms of fictionalism distinguished are in the first instance forms of
content fictionalism. Notice that content and force fictionalism can
be combined. A fictionalist can hold both that in an (ordinary)
utterance of sentence of 
D
, the literal content of the
sentence is conveyed but not asserted, and that some content other
than the literal content is asserted. This is even a rather natural
view: in an ordinary utterance of a sentence of 
D
, the
speaker pretends-true the literal content of the sentence, and in so
doing she asserts something other than the literal content.



Thus far matters have been presented as if the content fictionalist must
put forward a thesis about what is asserted when the relevant
sentences are uttered. But again there are different kinds of views. A
fictionalist can in principle refrain from saying that the
fictionalist content is asserted and instead say that the content is
put forward in some other way. Compare how some things that are communicated
are merely pragmatically implicated. (See the entries
 on 
implicature
 
 and
 on 
pragmatics
.)
 However, the following discussion will disregard this complication
and speak of the content fictionalist as putting forward a thesis
about what is asserted.



Sometimes when fictionalism is discussed, it is presupposed that
fictionalism would have to be of the meta-fictionalist variety. This
is a mistake. There are objections to meta-fictionalism that do not
generalize to other fictionalist theses. Joyce (2005) stresses that
meta-fictionalism does not adequately distinguish between telling a
story and describing a story. When we engage in fiction we do the
former, but the meta-fictionalist has it that we do the latter. Yablo
(2001) stresses, in the case of mathematical fictionalism, that in
ordinary uses of mathematical sentences, we seem to assert something
apriori and necessary, but it does not seem apriori and necessary that
according to the fiction of standard mathematics, things stand
thus-and-so. Generally, meta-fictionalism appeals to
an “according to the fiction…”-operator, but
the problems that arise regarding this are beside the point on either
of the other fictionalist views. (See Kim 2005 for a discussion of
some of the problems that arise, having to do with, e.g., the
contingent existence of fictions.)


2.4 Attitudes



There is also a question of what 
mental attitude
 the
hermeneutic fictionalist about a discourse 
D
 should say that
we have toward utterances made within 
D
. As the name
“fictionalism” indicates, the attitude is often
taken to be the attitude, whatever exactly it is, that we
have toward paradigmatic cases of fiction. (The motivation for
adopting the attitude may be different in paradigmatic cases of
fiction than in the case of one of the discourses under consideration
here. But that is different.) The attitude is also often said to be
that of 
pretense
 or 
make-believe
. Those who compare

D
 with make-believe normally rely on the account of
make-believe of Walton (1990, 1993). Yablo’s (e.g. 1998, 2001,
2002) brand of hermeneutic fictionalism is one example. The
Yablo-Walton view is usefully divided into two parts. First, the
statements made within 
D
 are likened to 
metaphorical

statements. Second, a 
pretense account of metaphor
 is given.
On this type of view on metaphor, a metaphorical utterance is one that
represents the world as it needs to be in order to make the utterance
pretense-worthy in a game of make-believe that it suggests. An example
may help. Just as “Bert is carrying a gun” can be made
true, in the pretense relevant to this utterance, by Bert’s
holding a twig, so, on this view on metaphor, can Romeo’s
“Juliet is the sun” be made true by features of Juliet and
of the relation between Romeo and Juliet, given the pretense that
Romeo’s utterance makes relevant. For example, the utterance may
be made true by Juliet’s bearing the right type of real-world
relation to Romeo’s well-being. (See Wearing 2012 for criticism
of this kind of view on metaphor.)



Clearly there are views between a paradigmatic fictionalist view
on 
D
 such as that 
D
 is best given a
metaphor/pretense account and a paradigmatic realist view that
ordinary assertions within 
D
 aim at literal truth. (i) Van
Fraassen (1980), discussing scientific discourse, emphasizes that our
attitude toward our best theory of the world is, or should be,
‘acceptance’ rather than belief, where acceptance is an
attitude that falls short of belief. (ii) Yablo (2006) has
investigated the possibility that when engaging in mathematical
discourse we 
presuppose
 that mathematical entities exist.
(And while it is possible to assimilate presupposition to pretense
such an assimilation is not part of Yablo’s official story.)
Compare here also Hinckfuss (1993). (iii) A suggestion put forward in
Eklund (2005) is that when it comes to a variety of sentences we use,
we are often simply 
indifferent
 to some implications of what
they express: the fictionalist can appeal to this and say that we are
indifferent to the real-world existential implications of mathematical
statements. (iv) Walton (1990) himself insists that even if he is
giving a pretense account, the claim is not that speakers themselves

actively engage
 in pretense. For a pretense account to be
correct of the utterances of some given speaker, it is enough that the
speaker participates in a pretense discourse. Compare here also
how Crimmins’ (1998), when talking about what he calls
“shallow pretense”, emphasizes that, despite
the talk of pretense, “we are instituting a manner of
speaking, not painting a fantasy world”. Which of these
different theses to call “fictionalist” is a matter of
terminological choice. But arguably, all the theses listed share
the main attractions of paradigmatic versions of fictionalism. For
example, they serve to avoid ontological commitment as much as
paradigmatic versions of fictionalism do.


3. Arguments for Fictionalism



Given the variety of fictionalisms it is hard to provide a succinct
survey of the arguments for and against fictionalism simpliciter. This
section is devoted to an overview of certain fictionalism-relevant
arguments, together with remarks on what forms of fictionalism these
arguments purport to justify. The overview focuses primarily on the
kinds of arguments that appear to be of relevance for
fictionalism as a general philosophical strategy, instead of arguments
that seem only to promise to be relevant to fictionalism about a
specific subject matter.


3.1 Via eliminativist antirealism



One historically important argument for fictionalism goes as follows.
Suppose that we have an independent argument
for 
eliminativist antirealism 
about a particular
discourse (whether it be mathematical discourse, or moral discourse,
or … .): an argument to the effect that the
atomic sentences of the discourse are all untrue, either because the
characteristic objects of the discourse do not exist — there are
no numbers — or because its characteristic predicates are
uninstantiated — nothing is right, good, etc. This eliminativist
antirealism threatens to convict ordinary speakers of massive,
widespread error. This is often regarded as a serious problem. It is
here that fictionalism comes to the rescue: if we suppose that the
utterances in question are made in a fictional spirit, then
eliminativist antirealism about (say) mathematics does not commit
ordinary speakers of massive error.



As set out, this is an argument for hermeneutic fictionalism.
Revolutionary fictionalism, aiming to secure a purpose that
mathematical discourse can serve even if mathematical entities do not
exist, would not avert the threat that the eliminativist antirealist
would have to say of ordinary speakers that they are in massive error.
But there is a nearby argument for revolutionary fictionalism. It goes
like this: Eliminativist antirealism threatens to come at a serious
cost. If by the lights of our philosophy of mathematics there are no
mathematical entities, it seems mathematical discourse must be
abandoned (because mathematical utterances are systematically untrue):
such discourse cannot be worthwhile. It is here that revolutionary
fictionalism comes to the rescue: so long as there is some worthwhile
aim of mathematical discourse despite the nonexistence of mathematical
entities, mathematical discourse need not be abandoned.



Consider, as illustration, some specific motivations for
revolutionary fictionalism. First, Joyce (2005; see also his
forthcoming) on moral fictionalism. Joyce starts out from the
assumption that, when taken literally, moral sentences are
systematically untrue, and seeks to show that it can still be
practically useful to pretend that it is not so. Joyce asks first what
the benefits are of believing that some acts are morally right and
others morally wrong, and thinks that even when such a belief is
false, it can be valuable: “The distinctive value of categorical
imperatives is that they silence calculations. In this manner, moral
beliefs function to bolster self-control against practical
irrationality” (301). The basic idea is that for prudential
reasons, essentially reasons such as those suggested by Hobbes and
Hume, one ought generally to act in accordance with alleged moral
requirements (“the fear of punishment, the desire for an ongoing
beneficial relationship, the motivation to maintain a good reputation,
the simple fact that one on the whole likes one’s
fellows,…”). But were it not for the moral beliefs one
might still be tempted by the short term gains from acting immorally.
Turning to moral fictionalism, Joyce thinks that the make-believe that
moral properties are instantiated can have the same benefits as the
genuine belief that they are. In general, fictions can produce real
emotions, which have motivational effects. Joyce remarks, “Human
motivation is often aroused more effectively by mental images than by
mental calculation”. Second, consider Field’s (1980, 1989)
revolutionary fictionalism in the philosophy of mathematics. On
Field’s view the function of mathematics is to facilitate
inferences from certain empirical, and nominalistically acceptable,
statements to others. A mathematical theory can perform this function
so long as it is conservative, where a mathematical theory 
T

is conservative if, roughly, for every nominalistic theory 
N
,

T
+
N
 has no consequences for the ontology of

N
 that are not consequences of 
N
 alone. The
important point is that a mathematical theory need not be true in
order to be useful in this way. In both these cases, the supposed
lesson from the considerations adduced is that pretense would serve us
as well as real belief or real assertion.



This first kind of argument for fictionalism is only an indirect
argument for a fictionalist view. It says only that if we have
reason to embrace eliminativist antirealism about some discourse, then
fictionalism about the discourse should also be attractive.


3.2 The Oracle



Suppose a being you are certain is an omniscient Oracle told you there
are not in fact any abstract entities; you come to believe this claim.
Would you not go on talking as before? Wouldn’t you continue to
say things like “You can’t tile that rectangular floor
with 17 tiles, for 17 is a prime number” and other seemingly
committing sentences? And would anything really, so to speak, be or
feel different about your use of these sentences?



If the verdict is that we really would continue using these sentences
as before and nothing would seem different about our use of them, then
we have here an argument for hermeneutic fictionalism. After the
Oracle’s pronouncement we arguably no longer commit ourselves to
the existence of abstract entities. But if we are just going on as
before, we were not thus committing ourselves earlier either.



The Oracle argument has primarily been used in discussions of abstract
objects. But the strategy is clearly in principle generalizable. Take
for instance the moral case. Suppose an Oracle were to tell you that
really there are no moral facts. It can be argued that this would not
cause you to change your practice of making moral assertions. The case
can be argued to be analogous with the mathematics case.



The Oracle argument assumes that the ontological commitments of a
speaker’s assertions are transparent to the speaker. It can
legitimately be denied that speakers have the relevant sort of access
to their commitments. As stated, the argument is obviously an
argument for 
hermeneutic
, not revolutionary, fictionalism. An
Oracle argument for revolutionary fictionalism would rather emphasize
that the Oracle’s statement would give us no 
reason
 to
abandon the discourse.



(The Oracle argument is from Yablo 2000a. The thought experiment
itself is originally from Burgess and Rosen 1997.)


3.3 The paradox of existence



Here is a kind of puzzle or paradox that several philosophers have
stressed. On the one hand, existence questions seem hard. The
philosophical question of whether there are abstract entities does not
seem to admit of an easy or trivial answer. At the same time, there
seem to be trivial arguments settling questions like this in the
affirmative. Consider for instance the arguments, “2+2=4. So
there is a number which, when added to 2, yields 4. This something is
a number. So there are numbers”, and “Fido is a dog. So
Fido has the property of being a dog. So there are properties.”
How should one resolve this paradox? One response is: adopt
fictionalism. The idea would be that in the philosophy room we do not
speak fictionally, but ordinarily we do. So in the philosophy room,
the question of the existence of abstract entities is hard; outside
it, the question is easy. When, ordinarily, a speaker utters a
sentence that semantically expresses a proposition that entails that
there are numbers, what she says is accurate so long as according to
the relevant fiction, there are numbers. But when she utters the same
sentence in the philosophy room, she speaks literally and then what
she asserts is something highly non-trivial. The fictionalism that
would seem to be motivated by this reasoning is use fictionalism.



(See, e.g., Yablo 2000a, Szabó 2001, Hofweber 2000, and
Thomasson 2013 for discussion of this type of argument. However, of
these authors, only Yablo uses the paradox of existence to motivate
fictionalism. Szabó, Hofweber and Thomasson all prefer other
diagnoses.)


3.4 Analogies with uncontroversially non-literal discourse



One way to argue for fictionalism about a region of discourse is to
show that our use of declarative sentences within the discourse
resembles our use of non-literal language in other areas. Here are
three considerations that can be brought up under this heading.



(1) Unobtrusive metaphors — metaphors that easily go unnoticed
— are quite common. So we should not be surprised if some
philosophically interesting discourse should turn out to be permeated
by such metaphors. Consider the following list from Yablo (2000a):



They put a lot of hurdles in your path, there’s a lot that could
be said about that, there’s no precedent for that, something
tells me you’re right, there are some things better left unsaid,
there is something I forgot to tell you, viz. how to operate the lock,
nothing gets my goat as much as chewing gum in class, a lot you can do
for me, let’s roll out the red carpet, the last thing I want is
to…, their people have risen in my esteem, I took her into my
confidence, my patience is nearly exhausted, I’ll take my
chances, there’s a trace of sadness in your eyes, a growing
number of these leaks can be traced to Starr’s office,
she’s got a lot of smarts, let’s pull out all the stops,
let’s proceed along the lines suggested above.




The idea is that there are many unobtrusive metaphors; and that if
metaphors can often be this unobtrusive, then maybe the
non-literalness of our actual utterances of sentences of 
D
 is
also unobtrusive. Of course, the claim that all the above sentences
are examples of metaphors is controversial. One can insist that
some of the examples are not metaphors but idioms. And one can insist
that for some of the examples, the only reason to regard them as
non-literal would stem from a prior conviction that their literal
truth would require metaphysical absurdities. But so long as there are
a fair number of unobtrusive metaphors, Yablo has a point.



(2) Relatedly, one way that fictionalists try to argue for their
doctrines is by appeal to cases where, supposedly, fictionalist theses
are obviously true. Consider first motion discourse. Some
fictionalists (e.g. Boghossian and Velleman 1997 and van Inwagen 1990)
appeal to how we happily say things like “the sun rises”
despite knowing fully well that this sentence is not literally true in
the relevant contexts of utterance. The idea is that for the literal
truth of these sentences, a Ptolemaic, absolutist worldview would have
to be correct. But obviously, even though we use these sentences to
make assertions, we do not believe this sort of worldview to be true.
We engage instead in a Ptolemaic, absolutist fiction. Next
consider expressions of the form ‘the average 
F
’.
We routinely utter declarative sentences containing such expressions
in subject position; it seems that for such a sentence to be literally
true there would really have to be an average 
F
. This seems
absurd. It seems odd that we should cheerfully commit ourselves to
such an absurdity. Hence, it is sometimes suggested (see, e.g., Yablo
2000a), hermeneutic fictionalism is true of the use of these
expressions.



(3) Both in his (2000a) and elsewhere, Yablo draws up a list of
analogies between on the one hand uncontroversially non-literal
discourse and on the other hand discourse about “platonic
objects”, which for present purposes one can think of these
simply as would-be objects ripe for fictionalist treatment. I
will not here reproduce the whole list, but here are representative
samples:







Paraphrasability: [Creatures of metaphorical make-believe] are often
paraphrasable away with no felt loss of subject matter. ‘That
was her first encounter with the green-eyed monster’ goes to
‘that was her first time feeling jealous’. ‘That
really gets my goat’ goes to ‘that really irritates
me’.



[Platonic objects] are often paraphrasable away with no felt loss of
subject matter. ‘There is a possible world with furry
donkeys’ goes to ‘furry donkeys are possible’.
‘She did it one way or another’ goes to ‘she did it
somehow’. Etc.
 





Silliness: [Creatures of metaphorical make-believe] invite
‘silly questions’ probing areas the make-believe does not
address, e.g. we know how big the average star is, but where is it
located? You say you lost your nerve, has it been turned in? Do you
plan to 
drop
-forge the uncreated conscience of your race in
the smithy of your soul?



[Platonic objects] invite questions which are similarly silly. What
are the intrinsic properties of the empty set? Is the event of the
water’s boiling itself hot? Are universals wholly present in
each of their instances? Do relations lead a divided existence,
parcelled out among their relata?
 





It is obviously debatable exactly how telling these analogies are. One
may for example reasonably suspect that the claim that the supposedly
silly questions about platonic objects really all are silly will have
appeal only for philosophers of a certain bent of mind.


4. Arguments against Fictionalism



Turn now to arguments against fictionalism. As with the arguments for
fictionalism, the focus will be on arguments that are relevant to
fictionalism as a general metaphysical strategy, rather than arguments
that only are relevant to fictionalism about a given subject matter.
Many of the arguments discussed here are directed primarily against
fictionalism of the hermeneutic variety.


4.1 The phenomenological objection



The most obvious objection to fictionalism is that it seems just
absurd to assimilate some seemingly sober discourse such as
mathematical or modal or moral discourse to make-believe and fiction.
(“Mathematical discourse just doesn’t 
seem
 at all
like a fairytale.”) This is an objection specifically targeted
against hermeneutic fictionalism; it is plainly irrelevant as directed
against a revolutionary fictionalist.



We have already seen some fictionalist replies to this objection. One
reply (section 3.4) is that, philosophically interesting discourses
aside, we engage in make-believe and fiction more often than we
ordinarily tend to think. Another reply — related to the
distinctions drawn in section 2.4 — is that there are variants
of fictionalism that do not claim there to be a close analogy between
the target discourse on the one hand and fiction and make-believe on
the other. For discussion of the phenomenological objection, see,
e.g., Brock (2014).



There have been attempts to make what is essentially the
phenomenological objection more precise. Jason Stanley (2001) has two
related objections concerning the nature of the fictionalist’s
appeal to pretense. First, the hermeneutic fictionalist says that we
are engaged in make-believe where it doesn’t seem to us that we
are. Stanley says, “If the hermeneutic fictionalist is
correct, then 
x
 can bear the propositional attitude of
pretense toward a proposition, without it being in principle
accessible to 
x
 that 
x
 bears the propositional
attitude of pretense towards that proposition. But this introduces a
novel and quite drastic form of failure of first-person authority over
one’s own mental states”. Second, by what the fictionalist
says, the same psychological mechanisms as are involved in
make-believe are involved in understanding the use of a discourse of
which fictionalism is true. But it seems this can be shown to be
problematic on empirical grounds. Autistic persons have difficulties
with make-believe, so by the fictionalist’s hypothesis they
should likewise have difficulties understanding the use of a discourse
of which fictionalism is true. But autistic persons do not have
difficulties with mathematical discourse, or modal discourse, or
discourse concerning negative existentials, etc. (For discussion of
Stanley’s autism objection, see Liggins 2010.)


4.2 Can fictionalism deliver the goods?



Even though there are many different arguments for and motivations
behind fictionalism, one main motivation is clearly the ontological
one. Fictionalism about a discourse 
D
 is often seen as
attractive precisely because it promises to get around otherwise
potentially serious philosophical problems regarding

D
’s ontology. But one worry is that fictionalism can
fail to make good on this promise. Here are some examples of how this
can happen.



First, according to fictionalism about a given discourse, the
discourse is in important respects analogous to paradigmatic cases of
fiction. This is supposed to have ontological advantages.
Specifically, the entities characteristic of the relevant discourse
are sometimes supposed to then have the same ontological status
as fictional entities. But if fictional entities are problematic in
their own right, then not much is gained by this move. Fictionalism
about fictional characters — see, e.g., Brock (2002), and
Everett (2005), and ch. 10 of Walton (1990) — is one attempt to
get around this problem. A different response to the objection is that
it takes the label “fictionalism” too seriously. Again to
stress, some prominent views going under the heading
of fictionalism claim only that in ordinary utterances of
sentences of some discourse, speakers don’t aim at literal
truth. That claim by no means amounts to saying that the putative
entities of the discourse have the same ontological status as
fictional entities, whatever exactly that status is.



Second, consider Peter van Inwagen’s (1990) fictionalism about
ordinary objects. Van Inwagen suggests that when we say, e.g.,
“There is a table here”, what we really assert is
something like: there are 
simples arranged tablewise
 here.
Sider (1993) notes a problem: van Inwagen’s paraphrase strategy
presupposes that there are simples and not gunk (in other words, it
presupposes that all objects decompose into minimal parts,
‘simples’) and there is no straightforward way of
reformulating it so as to take into account the possibility of gunk.
If indeed it seems at all wrong that in our everyday discourse we
should manifest a preference for the hypothesis that there are
macrophysical objects over agnosticism about the matter, it should
anyway seem more wrong still that in our ordinary practices we should
manifest a preference for the hypothesis that there are simples rather
than gunk. Sider’s point concerns only van Inwagen’s
specific strategy. But there is a general lesson nearby: the adequacy
of the paraphrases might itself depend on substantive metaphysical
assumptions.


4.3 Criticisms concerning systematicity



One main worry that Stanley (2001) presses with respect to hermeneutic
fictionalism concerns systematicity. Take the case of mathematics.
Infinitely many sentences belong to mathematical discourse, and to be
competent with mathematical discourse involves having the competence
to grasp these infinitely many sentences. Standard considerations
concerning the finitude of our minds require that our grasp of these
infinitely many sentences is something we have by virtue of our grasp
of some finite set of principles: a compositional semantic theory is
required. But it is, the worry goes, unclear what a compositional
fictionalist semantic theory might conceivably look like.



Yablo’s (2001) response to the systematicity objection is to
say, “There are kinds of speech that finite beings clearly do
understand, yet whose semantics does not seem to be compositional. One
does not expect a compositional semantics for hyperbole, metonymy, or
irony: one does not expect a compositional semantics for speech
governed by shifting presuppositions. Somehow, though, we understand.
This suggests that [hermeneutic fictionalist] analyses directed at
kinds of speech that resemble hyperbole, metonymy, or etc. should not
be held to the standard of strong-systematicity-or-bust”. One
can be sympathetic to much of what Yablo says but think that the
reason why we do not expect a compositional semantics for hyberbole is
that we do not really expect a 
semantics
 for hyperbole at
all. We do not think that there are certain sentences that have
hyperbolic 
meanings
 — whatever that would amount to
— but rather that sometimes some sentences are 
used

hyperbolically. Even so, there is something telling about what Yablo
says. The analogy with hyperbole and irony shows Yablo to be a use
fictionalist: his hypothesis is not one about the types of meanings
mathematical sentences have but about what we ordinarily do with
mathematical sentences. From this perspective, the demand for a
compositional fictionalist semantics for mathematical sentences is
misplaced, for the reason that the fictionalist does not propose a
special 
semantics
 for mathematical sentences at all.



These remarks are not meant to indicate that the mathematical
fictionalist does not owe us a systematic account of what is
communicated by mathematical sentences. The point is just that
whatever is owed, it is not a compositional semantics. Yablo’s
analogy, hyperbole, can be used to make the point, despite the obvious
differences between this case and the mathematics case. All that is
needed properly to understand hyperbole is an ordinary compositional
semantics giving the literal meanings of the sentences involved plus a
general principle relating the propositions semantically expressed by
the sentences to the inflated propositions the sentences express when
used hyperbolically. Similarly, given use fictionalism all that is
needed properly to understand what is communicated in ordinary
utterances of mathematical sentences is an ordinary compositional
semantics, together with principles linking the literal contents of
mathematical sentences to what the fictionalist says the utterances
ordinarily convey.


4.4 The fictionalist’s preferred analogies



As noted above, one way that fictionalists try to argue for their
doctrines is by appeal to cases where, supposedly, fictionalist theses
are obviously true. Two such cases are motion discourse, and talk
about ‘the average 
F
’. However, in both of these
cases, it can plausibly be argued that proper attention to the

semantics
 undercuts the fictionalist’s claim.



First, critics such as Stanley (2001) stress that while terms of the
form ‘the average 
F
’ superficially seem like
singular terms, they do not behave semantically like ordinary singular
terms. But if they do not behave semantically like ordinary singular
terms there is no call for a fictionalist account explaining why we do
not commit ourselves to there being entities such as the average F
when assertively uttering sentences of the form “the average

F
 is G” (see also Kennedy and Stanley 2009).



Turn next to motion discourse. Brendan Jackson (2007) argues that any
temptation to be a fictionalist about motion discourse stems from an
oversimplified conception of the semantics of the relevant sentences.
Compare




Europe is small.


That cell phone is a bit heavy.


The remote is to the left of the television.


A lion is hiding behind the bush.





Jackson notes two things. First, these cases are “analogous to
what is going on when we utter typical motion ascriptions. We can
describe all these utterances as 
incomplete
, in the sense
that there is some parameter — a comparison class, a purpose, a
perspective or a frame of reference — that must be taken into
account if the utterance is to be regarded as expressing a possibly
true proposition, and yet the utterance contains no explicit word or
phrase that specifies a value for this parameter”. And second,
the standard semantic account of what is going on in (1)–(4) is
that the sentences are simply 
context-sensitive
. There
is no need for a fictionalist proposal to explain why in typical
utterances of them we express something true. According to Jackson,
the same story can be told in the case of motion ascriptions.



The points concerning motion discourse and ‘the average

F
’ in the first instance cast doubt only on some
specific examples that fictionalists tend to use to motivate their
fictionalist theses. But they also suggest a more general lesson:
fictionalist theses can often be undercut by closer attention to the
semantics of the discourse in question.


4.5 Philosophy of language concerns



The hermeneutic fictionalist about a discourse 
D
 typically
claims that there is a radical mismatch between on the one hand what
we may call the 
assertoric contents
 of utterances of
sentences of 
D
 (what is expressed in ordinary utterances of
these sentences) and on the other hand the 
semantic contents

of these sentences (what these sentences semantically express, in the
contexts of utterance). But when it is stated thus baldly what the
strategy is, two related worries should immediately arise, having to
do with foundational issues in the philosophy of language.



Many philosophers would agree that the semantic content of a
sentence is somehow determined, at least largely, by what the sentence
is customarily used to express. This would seem to entail that there
must be a close connection between the semantic content of a sentence
and how the sentence is customarily used. But then it is odd if there
is the kind of systematic mismatch between assertoric content and
semantic content that the fictionalist claims that there is; or that
is the worry.



There are deep and unresolved issues in philosophy of language
concerning the nature of assertoric and semantic content,
respectively, and concerning the relation between them. While these
issues remain unresolved, it may be premature to put forward strong
claims about the relation of the assertoric and semantic contents.
Generally, and relating back to the points made in the previous
subsection, it can be suspected that fictionalists tend to have a too
simple view of semantic content.



One fictionalist reply to these concerns is to say that it is only for
argument’s sake that she adopts a conservative view of the
semantic contents of the sentences of the discourse in question. She
can say that her basic point is that the discourses are not in fact
ontologically committing. If the sentences are not ontologically
committing even when they are used literally, that is fine. What she
is arguing is that even assuming that the sentences are
ontologically committing as used literally, there is reason to think
that the discourse is not ontologically committing. Perhaps, in light
of the point about how use determines meaning, the fact that our use
of the sentences is not ontologically committing should cast doubt on
any semantics of these sentences given which they are. But that does
not affect the more general philosophical point the fictionalist is
typically concerned to make: that the discourse is not ontologically
committing.


4.6 Old problems in new bottles?



One kind of worry one might have about fictionalism is that it does
not really, by itself, help avoid the problems that beset similar
approaches. Here are two examples.



(1) Paraphrase. Since long before fictionalism really came into vogue,
philosophers have liked to appeal to paraphrase: it has often been
claimed that sentences which seem to express such-and-such
propositions, really only express such-and-such other propositions.
(E.g., it sounds as if you are genuinely talking about external
objects, but really you are only claiming something about actual and
possible sense-data.) Often such appeals to paraphrase have foundered
upon the details: telling objections have shown how the paraphrases
fail to deal with all the sentences within the purview of the
proposal. Objections to some fictionalist theories that have been
proposed take a similar form, since some fictionalists in effect offer
paraphrases. Take for instance van Inwagen’s (1985) objection to
fictionalism about fictional characters, as espoused for instance by
Kendall Walton (1985, 1990, 2000). Consider van Inwagen’s pair
of sentences,




(S1)


There is a fictional character who, for every novel, either
appears in that novel or is a model for a character who does.





and




(S2)


If no character appears in every novel, then some character is
modeled on another character.





Sentence (S1) seems to entail sentence (S2), but, the charge is, the
paraphrases offered by Walton do not respect this. The paraphrases
that Walton offers are of the form “To engage in pretense of
kind K is fictionally to speak truly in a game of such-and-such a
sort”: but then the paraphrase of (S2) is not entailed by the
paraphrase of (S1). There is naturally much that can be said about the
objection. (The reply Walton (2000) himself gives is that the claim
that (S1) entails (S2) is itself pretend-true.) The same sort of
objection is pressed by Richard (2000), Stanley (2001) and Kroon
(2004) against Mark Crimmins’ (1998) fictionalism about
propositional attitude talk and discourse involving empty names.



(2) In his (2005a) defense of a version of moral fictionalism, Mark
Kalderon argues that would-be non-cognitivists who seek to avoid the
Frege-Geach problem (for a presentation of this problem see the
Embedding Problem section of the entry on
 
moral cognitivism vs. non-cognitivism
)
 should adopt a version of moral fictionalism. The resulting theory
would be one according to which moral sentences have ordinary
representational contents, but acceptance of moral sentences does not
amount to belief in the literal truth of these contents but rather
only to holding a non-cognitive attitude toward them. The reason why
this is supposed to get around the Frege-Geach problem would be that
arguments like




(P1)


Stealing is wrong.


(P2)


If stealing is wrong, then getting one’s little brother to
steal is wrong.


(C)


So, getting one’s little brother to steal is wrong.





turn out on this revised non-cognitivist view to be straightforwardly
valid: for the proposition semantically expressed by the conclusion
sentence is entailed by the propositions semantically expressed by the
premise sentences.



However, one may reasonably worry that the envisaged fictionalist move
in fact doesn’t help at all with the Frege-Geach problem.
Someone actually 
putting forward
 an argument like this
would be presenting a good argument. But for this to be so, what the
arguer actually expresses by the premise sentence must provide good
reason to accept what she actually expresses by the conclusion
sentence. Since what the arguer actually expresses is, on the
fictionalist view, different from what the sentences she utters
semantically express, it is not sufficient for the fictionalist to
point to how the sentences (P1) and (P2), when taken literally,
express propositions that entail the proposition expressed by the
sentence (C) taken literally. Kalderon’s moral fictionalist
faces the problem of giving an account that respects the fact that the
argument actually put forward is valid. But this seems not to be
essentially different from the traditional non-cognitivist’s
problem of saying what the meanings of the relevant sentences are such
that the impression that the argument is valid can be respected. (This
objection to Kalderon was stated, more briefly, in the original 2007
version of this entry, and was also presented, independently, in
Lenman 2008. Kalderon replied to it in his 2008a and 2008b, and Eklund
2009 is in turn a reply to Kalderon. See also ch. 6 of Miller
2013.)


4.7 Other objections



This section briefly presents three other general objections to
fictionalism.



One recurring concern with fictionalism is that the fictionalist draws
a distinction without a difference: there is no real difference
between belief and the supposed distinct attitude that the
fictionalist posits. (For discussion, see Daly (2008), Horwich (1991),
O’Leary-Hawthorne (1994), Rosen (2020), Rosen and Burgess (2005) and
Thomasson (2013).) As just stated, the objection may sound like an
obvious non-starter: of course there is a difference between belief
and whatever attitude it is that we take toward fiction. But there are
some reasons to still take the objection seriously. First, as already
stressed, fictionalists do often appeal to a different attitude from
the one we adopt toward paradigmatic cases of fiction, and for that
reason alone one cannot move straight from the obvious possibility of
engaging in fiction to the possibility of us doing what the
philosophical fictionalist says we do, or should do. Second, it is
characteristic of fiction that we sometimes do abandon the perspective
internal to the fiction and instead adopt an external, critical
perspective. Nothing similar seems to standardly be going on with,
say, mathematical discourse or moral discourse. However, these points
noted, it is still natural for the fictionalist to shrug off this
concern, saying with Rosen (2020) that the question of whether someone
who is generally disposed to behave as if p really beliefs that p can
simply be settled by what the person is disposed to say upon
reflection regarding whether she believes that p or not.



Second, there is the incompleteness objection. Ordinary fictions are
incomplete. While 
Gravity’s Rainbow
 tells us some things
about Tyrone Slothrop it is simply silent regarding other things. Are
the fictions that the fictionalist relies on similarly incomplete?
Insofar as it is so, a problem looms. If the fictionalist maintains,
for every sentence of a given discourse, that this sentence is true
iff it is true according to the relevant fiction, then if the fiction
is simply silent on whether p, neither “p” nor
“~p” is true, for neither is true according to the
relevant fiction. A number of different solutions have been suggested
to this problem. See Rosen (1990), Nolan (2020), Skiba (2016), and
Woodward (2012) for discussions. Let me here just stress that the
problem only clearly arises for certain forms of fictionalism. At
least as stated, the objection depends on taking the analogy with
fiction quite seriously, and also on the fictionalism in question
having to do with meaning rather than use. If the fictionalist just
aims to put forward a thesis about use, then the incompleteness
objection is no more problematic than that utterances of sentences
often can fail to be true or false, for a number of different
reasons.



Third, there is the Brock-Rosen objection, primarily discussed as an
objection to modal fictionalism. (The objection is presented in Brock
1993 and Rosen 1993. The presentation below follows Divers and
Hagen’s (2006) presentation.) Consider the proposition




(
P
)


There is a plurality of worlds,





where by ‘worlds’ we mean Lewisian possible worlds. The
modal fictionalist doesn’t want to commit herself to the literal
truth of 
P
. But the objection is that she ends up doing so
anyway. For




(1)


According to the modal fiction, at every world, 
P
.





Now, the modal fictionalist holds, the objection goes, that for every
modal sentence ‘
A
’,




(
M
)


‘
A
’ is true iff according to the
modal fiction, 
A
*,





where ‘
A
*’ is the translation of
‘
A
’ into possible worlds talk.



An instance of (
M
) is then




(2)


‘Necessarily 
P
’ is true iff according to the
modal fiction, at every world, 
P
.





By (1) and (2) together with disquotational principles concerning
truth,




(3)


Necessarily 
P
.





And hence,




(4)


P
.





Although the Brock-Rosen objection was first raised against modal
fictionalism and has been most discussed in that context, it is
important to note that the objection generalizes. For instance, one
can run a similar argument in the case of numbers. (This was first
stressed in Nolan and O’Leary-Hawthorne 1996.) 



One diagnosis — and possible resolution — of this
problem relates to the distinctions earlier drawn. According to this
diagnosis, what the objection at most shows is that the fictionalist
should be a use fictionalist. If any kind of fictionalist has to rely
on general translation schemes such as (
M
) or (#) it is the
meaning fictionalist. The use fictionalist can, with no real loss,
employ them more selectively: it is only 
when speaking


within the fiction
 that we rely on them. (For this diagnosis,
presented in different terms, see Nolan and O’Leary-Hawthorne
1996, Yablo 2001, and Woodward 2007. For more on the Brock-Rosen
objection to modal fictionalism, see the entry on
 
modal fictionalism
.)


5. Significance



Let us lastly turn to the broader picture: the general philosophical
significance of fictionalism.



Obviously, and as earlier remarked, the hermeneutic fictionalist can
come to the eliminativist antirealist’s aid: adopting
fictionalism is for the eliminativist antirealist a more attractive
alternative than to adopt some form of error
 theory.
[
4
]
 Quite
 apart from positive motivations for antirealism, fictionalism is also
of relevance for evaluating particular arguments for realist views.
Let me discuss two such arguments.



First, consider we may call 
ordinary language arguments
.
An ordinary language argument for the existence of 
F
s goes as
follows. “(1) Sentences thus-and-such are true. (2) (Semantic
analysis shows that) for those sentences to be true, there must be

F
s. (3) So, there must be 
F
s.” An argument of
this form is clearly valid. The question of the soundness of an
argument of this kind comes down to whether the premises are true.
Hermeneutic fictionalism presents problems for the justification of
premise (1). Maybe all that is evident from ordinary discourse is that
we somehow convey or communicate true propositions when uttering the
relevant sentences. But hermeneutic fictionalism indicates how we can
do so without the sentences semantically expressing true propositions.
Thomasson (2013) is a recent extended discussion of the relation
between fictionalism and her own preferred ontological view, which is
argued for by what she calls “easy arguments”, a kind of
ordinary language arguments. Thomasson’s 
ontological
deflationism
 says, roughly, that all manners of philosophically
controversial entities exist, and do so in some sense trivially. The
way Thomasson presents things, fictionalism and ontological
deflationism are in conflict. But if fictionalism is only a linguistic
thesis (compare the distinction between the ontological thesis and the
linguistic thesis) — and that is how Thomasson appears to
understand it — that’s not quite true. What is true is
that fictionalism presents problems for Thomasson’s specific way
of arguing for ontological deflationism, by appeal to ordinary
language arguments. If we are only speaking fictionally, then what is
trivial concerns only what exists according to the relevant fiction
and not what non-fictionally exists.



Second, consider indispensability arguments. Let us again take
mathematics as our example. One of the most influential arguments for
platonism in the philosophy of mathematics is the indispensability
argument, according to which quantification over mathematical entities
is indispensable to our best theory of the world, and hence we should
take mathematical entities to exist. (This is a very rough
characterization of indispensability arguments. For more detail see
the entry on
 
indispensability arguments in the philosophy of mathematics
.)
 The possibility of revolutionary fictionalism suggests a
complication: even if, in some sense, quantification over mathematical
entities is indispensable to our best theory of the world, perhaps it
is not 
literal
 quantification over mathematical entities that
is thus indispensable. The possibility of hermeneutic
fictionalism suggests another kind of complication. Our guide to what
the best theory of the world is comes from what science puts forward.
But if we cannot trust that scientists aim at the literal truth,
that complicates matters.



Indispensability arguments are associated a
‘Quinean’ approach to ontology. Given this approach
— the approach of many of those theorists today who take
ontology seriously — we should believe in those entities that
our best theory of the world quantifies over. Although fictionalism
presents problems for specific Quinean arguments, like the
indispensability argument, fictionalists are naturally taken to be
methodological allies of orthodox Quineans. They can agree with
orthodox Quineans that we should believe in those entities that our
best theory of the world quantifies over. It is only that they would
stress that we must understand this to mean “
literally

quantifies over”, and that in some interesting cases the
condition of literalness is not satisfied.



More radically, however, the theme of one of Yablo’s earliest
papers on fictionalism, Yablo (1998), is that the availability of
fictionalism as a theoretical option presents problems for ontology as
a serious enterprise. Given that when the Quinean says that we should
believe in what the best theory quantifies over, this must be
understood to mean “
literally
 quantifies over”.
But then the Quinean program in ontology relies on the
literal/fictional distinction. But this distinction is problematic:
saying what parts of our speech are fictional and which are literal
is, Yablo argues, at least as problematic as saying which sentences
are synthetic and which are analytic. So there is at least as good
reason to doubt the literal/fictional distinction — and hence
the Quinean program in ontology — as there is to doubt the
analytic/synthetic distinction. This is ad hominem, since Quine
himself famously attacked the analytic/synthetic distinction.



There are two metaontological points that someone might be inclined to
make here. A relatively moderate point is that it is often so hard to
make out on what side of the literal/fictional distinction some
discourse falls that arguments of the Quinean kind seldom are well
supported. A different point is that there is sometimes — or, in
the most radical version of the idea, always — no fact of the
matter as to whether some piece of discourse is literal or fictional.
It is the most radical point here that is the most closely analogous
to what Quine says about the analytic/synthetic distinction.






Bibliography




Armour-Garb, B. and F. Kroon (eds.), 2020, 
Fictionalism in
Philosophy
, Oxford: Oxford University Press.


Armour-Garb, B. and J. Woodbridge, 2015, 
Pretense and
Pathology
, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.


Balaguer, M., 1998a, 
Platonism and Anti-Platonism in
Mathematics
, Oxford: Oxford University Press.


–––, 1998b, “Attitudes Without
Propositions”, 
Philosophy and Phenomenological
Research
, 98: 805–26.


Baron, S., K. Miller and J. Tallant, 2021, “Temporal
Fictionalism for a Timeless World”, 
Philosophy and
Phenomenological Research
, 102: 281–301.


Blackburn, S., 2005, “Quasi-Realism no Fictionalism”,
in Kalderon (ed.) 2005b, pp. 322–38.


Boghossian, P. and D. Velleman, 1997, “Color as a Secondary
Quality”, in A. Byrne and D. Hilbert (eds.), 
Readings on
Color Vol. 1: The Philosophy of Color
, Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.


Brock, S., 1993, “Modal Fictionalism: A Response to
Rosen”, 
Mind
, 102: 147–50.


–––, 2002, “Fictionalism about Fictional
Characters”, 
Noûs
, 36: 1–21.


–––, 2014, “The Phenomenological Objection
to Fictionalism”, 
Philosophy and Phenomenological
Research
, 88: 574–92.


Burgess, A. and J. Burgess, 2011, 
Truth
, Princeton:
Princeton University Press.


Burgess, J., 1983, “Why I am Not a Nominalist”,

Notre Dame Journal of Formal Logic
, 24: 93–105.


–––, 2004, “Mathematics and Bleak
House”, 
Philosophia Mathematica
, 12: 18–36.


Burgess, J. and G. Rosen, 1997, 
A Subject with no Object
,
Oxford: Clarendon Press.


Caddick Bourne E., 2013, “Fictionalism”,

Analysis
, 73: 147–62.


Crimmins, M., 1998, “Hesperus and Phosphorus: Sense,
Pretense, and Reference”, 
Philosophical Review
, 139:
423–40.


Daly, C., 2008, “Fictionalism and the Attitudes”,

Philosophical Studies
, 107: 1–48.


Demeter, T., T. Parent and A. Toon, 2002, 
Mental Fictionalism:
Philosophical Explorations
, Routledge.


Divers, J. and J. Hagen, 2006, “The Modal Fictionalist
Predicament”, in F. MacBride (ed.), 
Identity and
Modality
, Oxford: Oxford University Press.


Divers, J. and D. Liggins, 2005, “Fictionalism”, in

Encyclopaedia of Philosophy
, New York: MacMillan Reference,
2nd edn.


Dorr, C. and G. Rosen, 2002, “Composition as a
Fiction”, in R. Gale (ed.), 
The Blackwell Guide to
Metaphysics
, Oxford: Blackwell.


Duhem, P., 1913, 
Le Système du Monde; histoire des
doctrines cosmologiques de Platon à Copernic
, Paris: A.
Hermann; published in English as 
To Save the Phenomena: An Essay
on the Idea of Physical Theory from Plato to Galileo
, Edmund
Doland and Chaninah Maschler (trans.), Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, 1969.


Eklund, M., 2005, “Fiction, Indifference, and
Ontology”, 
Philosophy and Phenomenological Research
,
71: 557–79.


–––, 2009, “The Frege-Geach Problem and
Kalderon’s Moral Fictionalism”, 
Philosophical
Quarterly
, 59: 705–12.


Everett, A., 2005, “Against Fictional Realism”,

Journal of Philosophy
, 102: 624–49.


Everett, A. and T. Hofweber, (eds.), 2000, 
Empty Names,
Fiction and the Puzzles of Non-Existence
, Stanford: CSLI
Publications.


Field, H., 1980, 
Science Without Numbers
, Princeton:
Princeton University Press.


–––, 1989, 
Realism, Mathematics and
Modality
, Oxford: Blackwell.


Fine, A., 1993, “Fictionalism”, 
Midwest Studies in
Philosophy
, 18: 1–18.


French, P. and H. Wettstein, (eds.), 2001, 
Midwest Studies in
Philosophy Volume XXV: Figurative Language
, Oxford:
Blackwell.


Garfield, J., 2006, “Reductionism and Fictionalism: Comments
on Siderits”, 
American Philosophical Association Newsletter
on Asian and Comparative Philosophy
, 6: 1–8.


Gendler Szabó, Z., 2001, “Fictionalism and
Moore’s Paradox”, 
Canadian Journal of Philosophy
,
31: 293–308.


Hinckfuss, I., 1993, “Suppositions, Presuppositions, and
Ontology”, 
Canadian Journal of Philosophy
, 23:
595–618.


Hofweber, T., 2000, “Quantification and Non-Existent
Objects”, in Everett and Hofweber (2000), pp. 249–73.


Horwich, P., 1991, “The Nature and Norms of Theoretical
Commitment”, 
Philosophy of Science
, 58:
1–14.


Hussain, N., 2007, “Honest Illusion: Valuing for
Nietzsche’s Free Spirits”, in B. Leiter and N. Sinhababu
(eds.), 
Nietzsche and Morality
, Oxford: Oxford University
Press.


Jackson, B., 2007, “Truth vs Pretense in Discourse About
Motion (Or, Why the Sun Really Does Rise)”, 
Noûs
,
41: 289–317.


Joyce, R., 2001, 
The Myth of Morality
, Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.


–––, 2005, “Moral Fictionalism”, in
Kalderon (ed.) 2005b, pp. 287–313.


–––, forthcoming, 
Morality: From Error to
Fiction
, Oxford University Press.


Joyce, R. and S. Brock (eds.), forthcoming, 
Moral Fictionalism
and Religious Fictionalism
, Oxford University Press.


Kalderon, M., 2005a, 
Moral Fictionalism
, Oxford:
Clarendon Press.


––– (ed.), 2005b, 
Fictionalism in
Metaphysics
, Oxford: Oxford University Press.


–––, 2008a, “Moral Fictionalism, the
Frege-Geach Problem, and Reasonable Inference”,

Analysis
, 68: 133–43.


–––, 2008b, “The Trouble with
Terminology”, 
Philosophical Books
, 49:
33–41.


Kennedy, C. and J. Stanley, 2009, “On
‘Average’”, 
Mind
, 118: 583–646.


Kim, S., 2005, “Modal Fictionalism and Analysis”, in
Kalderon (ed.) 2005b, pp. 116–33.


Kroon, F., 2000, “Negative Existentials”, in Everett
and Hofweber (2000), pp. 95–116.


–––, 2004, “Descriptivism, Pretense, and
the Frege-Russell Problems”, 
Philosophical Review
, 113:
1–30.


–––, 2011, “Fictionalism in
Metaphysics”, 
Philosophy Compass
, 6:
786–803.


Kroon, F., J. McKeown-Green and S. Brock, 2018, 
A Critical
Introduction to Fictionalism
, Bloomsbury Academic.


Lenman, J., 2008, “Against Moral Fictionalism”,

Philosophical Books
, 49: 23–32.


LePoidevin, R., 2016, “Playing the God Game: The Perils of
Religious Fictionalism”, in A. Buckareff and Y. Nagasawa (eds.),

Alternative Concepts of God: Essays on the Metaphysics of the
Divine
, Oxford University Press.


–––, 2019, 
Religious Fictionalism
,
Cambridge University Press.


Lewis, D., 1978, “Truth in Fiction”, 
American
Philosophical Quarterly
, 15: 37–46.


–––, 2005, “Quasi-Realism is
Fictionalism”, in Kalderon (ed.) 2005b, pp. 314–21.


Logue, H., 2022, “Gender Fictionalism”, 
Ergo
,
8: 125–62.


Mackie, J., 1977, 
Ethics: Inventing Right and Wrong
,
Harmondsworth, New York: Penguin.


McCormick, P., (ed.), 1985, 
The Reasons of Art/L’Art a
ses Raisons
, Ottawa: University of Ottawa Press.


Melia, J., 1995, “On What There’s Not”,

Analysis
, 55: 223–9.


–––, 2000, “Weaseling Away the
Indispensability Argument”, 
Mind
, 109:
453–79.


Miller, A., 2013, 
Contemporary Metaethics: An
Introduction
, Cambridge: Polity Press, 2nd edn.


Nolan, D., and J. O’Leary-Hawthorne, 1996, “Reflexive
Fictionalisms”, 
Analysis,
 56: 26–32


Nolan, D., G. Restall and C. West, 2005, “Moral Fictionalism
Versus the Rest”, 
Australasian Journal of Philosophy
,
83: 307–30.


Ogden, C. K. (ed.), 1932, 
Bentham’s Theory of
Fictions
, New York: Harcourt, Brace and Company.


O’Leary-Hawthorne, J., 1994, “What does van
Fraassen’s Critique of Scientific Realism Show?”, 
The
Monist,
 77: 128–45.


Predelli, S., 2020, 
Fictional Discourse: A Radical
Fictionalist Semantics
, Oxford: Oxford University Press.


Richard, M., 2000, “Semantic Pretense”, in Everett and
Hofweber (2000), pp. 205–32.


Rosen, G., 1990, “Modal Fictionalism”, 
Mind
,
99: 327–54.


–––, 2005, “Problems in the History of
Fictionalism”, in Kalderon (2005b), pp. 14–64.


–––, 2020, “Metaphysics as a
Fiction”, in Armour-Garb and Kroon (2020).


Rosen, G. and J. Burgess, 2005, “Nominalism
Reconsidered”, in S. Shapiro (ed.), 
The Oxford Handbook of
Philosophy of Mathematics and Logic
, Oxford: Oxford University
Press.


Sainsbury, M., 2010, 
Fiction and Fictionalism
, London:
Routledge.


Searle, J., 1979, 
Expression and Meaning
, Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.


Sextus Empiricus, 
Outlines of Scepticism
, J. Annas and J.
Barnes (eds.), Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2000.


Sider, T., 1993, “Van Inwagen and the Possibility of
Gunk”, 
Analysis
, 53: 285–9.


Skiba, L. and R. Woodward, 2020, “Fictionalist Strategies in
Metaphysics”, in R. Bliss and J. Miller (eds.), 
The
Routledge Handbook of Metametaphysics
, Oxford: Oxford University
Press, pp. 259–269.


Stanley, J., 2001, “Hermeneutic Fictionalism”, in
French and Wettstein (2001), pp. 36–71.


Thomasson, A., 2013, “Fictionalism versus
Deflationism”, 
Mind
, 122: 1023–51.


Thomson, N., 2022, “Setting the Story Straight: Fictionalism
About Grounding”, 
Philosophical Studies
, 179:
343–61.


Toon, A., 2023, 
Mind as Metaphor: A Defence of Mental
Fictionalism
, Oxford: Oxford University Press.


Vaihinger, H., 1911, 
Die Philosophie des Als Ob
, Berlin:
Verlag von Reuther & Reichard; published in English as 
The
Philosophy of ‘As If’
, C.K. Ogden (trans.), London:
Kegan Paul, 1923.


Van Fraassen, B., 1980, 
The Scientific Image
, Oxford:
Oxford University Press.


Van Inwagen, P., 1985, “Pretence and Paraphrase”, in
McCormick (1985), pp. 414–22.


–––, 1990, 
Material Beings
, Ithaca, New
York: Cornell University Press.


–––, 2000, “Quantification and Fictional
Discourse”, in Everett and Hofweber (2000), pp.
235–47.


Varzi, A., 2013, “Fictionalism in Ontology”, in C.
Barbero, M. Ferraris and A. Voltolini (eds.), 
From Fictionalism to
Realism
, Newcastle: Cambridge Scholars Publishing.


Walton, K., 1985, “Fictional Entities”, in McCormick
(1985), pp. 403–13.


–––, 1990, 
Mimesis as Make-Believe
,
Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.


–––, 1993, “Metaphor and Prop Oriented
Make-Believe”, 
European Journal of Philosophy
, 1:
39–57. Reprinted in Kalderon (ed.) 2005b, pp. 65–87.


–––, 2000, “Existence as Metaphor?”,
in Everett and Hofweber (2000), pp. 69–94.


Wearing, C., 2012, “Metaphor, Idiom, and Pretense”,

Noûs
, 46: 499–524.


Woodbridge, J., 2005, “Truth as a Pretense”, in
Kalderon (ed.) 2005a, pp. 134–77.


Woodward, R., 2008, “Why Modal Fictionalism is not
Self-Defeating”, 
Philosophical Studies
, 139:
273–88.


Yablo, S., 1998, “Does Ontology Rest on a Mistake?”,

Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society
 (Supplementary
Volume), 72: 229–6. Reprinted in Yablo (2010).


–––, 2000a, “A Paradox of
Existence”, in Everett and Hofweber (2000), pp.
275–312.


–––, 2000b, “Apriority and
Existence”, in P. Boghossian and C. Peacocke (eds.), 
New
Essays on the A Priori
, Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp.
197–228. Reprinted in Yablo (2010).


–––, 2001, “Go Figure: A Path Through
Fictionalism”, in French and Wettstein (2001), pp. 72–102.
Reprinted in Yablo (2010).


–––, 2002, “Abstract Objects: A Case
Study”, 
Philosophical Issues
, 12: 220–40.
Reprinted in Yablo (2010).


–––, 2005, “The Myth of the Seven”,
in Kalderon (ed.) 2005a, pp. 88–115. Reprinted in Yablo
(2010).


–––, 2006, “Non-Catastrophic
Presupposition Failure”, in J. Thomson and A. Byrne (eds.),

Content and Modality: Themes from the Philosophy of Robert
Stalnaker
, Oxford: Oxford University Press. Reprinted in Yablo
(2010).


–––, 2010, 
Things: Papers on Objects,
Events, and Properties
, Oxford: Oxford University Press.








Academic Tools










How to cite this entry
.








Preview the PDF version of this entry
 at the
 
Friends of the SEP Society
.








Look up topics and thinkers related to this entry

 at the Internet Philosophy Ontology Project (InPhO).








Enhanced bibliography for this entry

at 
PhilPapers
, with links to its database.












Other Internet Resources



[Please contact the author with suggestions.]






Related Entries




abstract objects
 |
 
cognitivism vs. non-cognitivism, moral
 |
 
constructive empiricism
 |
 
fictionalism: modal
 |
 
imagination
 |
 
impossible worlds
 |
 
logic and ontology
 |
 
mathematics, philosophy of: fictionalism
 |
 
mathematics, philosophy of: indispensability arguments in the
 |
 
mathematics, philosophy of: naturalism
 |
 
mathematics, philosophy of: Platonism
 |
 
models in science
 |
 
moral anti-realism
 |
 
moral realism
 |
 
naturalism
 |
 
nominalism: in metaphysics
 |
 
nonexistent objects
 |
 
Platonism: in metaphysics
 |
 
propositions
 |
 
realism
 |
 
religious language
 |
 
Vaihinger, Hans










 






Copyright © 2024
 by



Matti Eklund
<
matti
.
eklund
@
filosofi
.
uu
.
se
>
    




 









  Open access to the SEP is made possible by a world-wide funding initiative.

  Please Read How You Can Help Support the Growth and Development of the Encyclopedia




 

