











 
 Entry Navigation 






Entry Contents


Bibliography


Academic Tools


Friends PDF Preview 


Author and Citation Info 
 


Back to Top 


























Charles Hartshorne
First published Mon Jul 23, 2001; substantive revision Sun Mar 3, 2024





Charles Hartshorne (pronounced Harts-horne) is considered by many
philosophers to be one of the most important philosophers of religion
and metaphysicians of the twentieth century. Although Hartshorne often
criticized the metaphysics of substance found in medieval philosophy,
he was very much like medieval thinkers in developing a philosophy
that was theocentric. Throughout his career he defended the
rationality of theism and for several decades was almost alone in
doing so among English-language philosophers. Hartshorne was also one
of the thinkers responsible for the rediscovery of St. Anselm’s
ontological argument. But his most influential contribution to
philosophical theism did not concern arguments for the

existence
 of God, but rather was related to a theory of the

actuality
 of God, i.e., 
how
 God exists. In
traditional or classical theism, God was seen as the supreme,
unchanging being, but in Hartshorne’s process-based or
neoclassical conception, God is seen as supreme becoming in which
there is a factor of supreme being. That is, we humans change for a
while, whereas God 
always
 changes, Hartshorne maintains. The
neoclassical view of Hartshorne has influenced the way many
philosophers understand the concept of God. In fact, a small number of
scholars—some philosophers and some theologians—think of
him as the greatest metaphysician of the second half of the twentieth
century, yet, with a few exceptions to be treated below, his work has
had limited influence among analytic philosophers who are theists.



In addition to Hartshorne’s many books, listed in the
bibliography below, scholars can benefit from four anthologies, also
listed in the bibliography, that gather together much of the
significant secondary literature on Hartshorne. These are the
anthologies edited by Cobb and Gamwell, Hahn, Reese and Freeman, and
Shields.








1. Life


2. Method


3. The Existence and Actuality of God


4. Axiology


5. Panpsychism or Psychicalism


6. Critical Evaluation


Bibliography




Books by Hartshorne


Secondary Sources






Academic Tools


Other Internet Resources


Related Entries










1. Life



Charles Hartshorne was born in the nineteenth century and lived to
philosophize in the twenty-first. He was born in Kittanning,
Pennsylvania (U.S.A.) on June 5, 1897. He was, like Alfred North
Whitehead, the son of an Anglican minister, although many of his
ancestors were Quakers. After attending Haverford College he served in
World War One in France as a medic, taking a box of philosophy books
with him to the front. After the war Hartshorne received his
bachelor’s degree and doctorate in philosophy at Harvard, and
there he met Whitehead. Most of the major elements of
Hartshorne’s philosophy were already apparent by the time he
became familiar with Whitehead’s thought, contrary to a popular
misconception. That is, Hartshorne came to many of the same
conclusions as Whitehead independently of Whitehead’s influence.
(One exception is Whitehead’s defense of eternal objects, in
partial contrast to Hartshorne’s theory of emergent universals,
the latter of which are arguably more consistent with a process
worldview.) From 1923–1925 a postdoctoral fellowship took him to
Germany, where he had classes with both Husserl and Heidegger. But
neither of these thinkers influenced his philosophy as much as C.S.
Peirce, whose collected papers he edited with Paul Weiss (see Thompson
1984). In addition to many visiting appointments, Hartshorne spent his
teaching career at three institutions. From 1928–1955 he taught
at the University of Chicago, where he was a dominant intellectual
force in the School of Divinity, despite the fact that he was housed
in the Philosophy Department, where he was not nearly as influential.
He was at Emory University from 1955 until 1962, when he moved to the
University of Texas at Austin. Hartshorne eventually became a
long-term emeritus professor at Austin and lived there until his death
on October 9, 2000. His wife, Dorothy, was as colorful as her husband
and was mentioned often in his writings. Hartshorne never owned an
automobile, nor did he smoke or drink alcohol or caffeine; he had a
passion for birdsong and became an internationally known expert in the
field.


2. Method



Three primary methodological devices or procedures are at work in
Hartshorne’s metaphysics. First, he very often uses a systematic
exhaustion of theoretical options—or the development of position
matrices, sometimes containing thirty-two alternatives (!)—in
considering philosophical problems. This procedure is evident
throughout his philosophy, but it is most apparent in his various
treatments of the ontological argument. To take another example, he
thinks it important to notice that regarding the mind-body problem
there are three options available to us, not two, as is usually
assumed: some form of dualism, some form of the materialist view that
psyche is reducible to body, 
and
 some form of the panpsychist
(or, as he terms it, psychicalist) view that body is in some way
reducible to psyche if all concrete singulars (e.g., cells or
electrons) in some way show signs of self-motion or activity. Thomas
Nagel famously considers this third option, but Hartshorne actually
defends it. The recent surge of interest in panpsychism indicates that
Hartshorne was ahead of his time by several decades in his ideas in
philosophy of mind.



Second, Hartshorne frequently uses the history of philosophy to see
which of the logically possible options made available by position
matrices have been defended before so as to avail ourselves of the
insights of others in the effort to examine in detail the consistency
of these positions and to assess their consequences (see J. Smith
1991; and Lucas 1991). Nonetheless, those logically possible options
that have not historically found support should be analyzed both in
terms of internal consistency and practical ramifications. It should
be noted that Hartshorne’s use of the history of philosophy
often involves lesser known views of famous thinkers (like
Plato’s belief in God as the soul for the body of the whole
natural world, or Leibniz’s defense of panpsychism) as well as
the thought of lesser known thinkers (such as Faustus Socinus,
Nicholas Berdyaev, Mohammed Iqbal, or Jules Lecquier).



Third, after a careful reading of the history of philosophy has
facilitated the conceptual and pragmatic examination of all the
available options made explicit by a position matrix, the (Greek)
principle of moderation is used by Hartshorne as a guide to negotiate
the way between extreme views on either side. For example, regarding
the issue of personal identity, the view of Hume (and of Bertrand
Russell at one stage in his career) is that, strictly speaking, there
is no personal identity in that each event in “a person’s
life” is externally related to the others. This is just as
disastrous, Hartshorne thinks, as Leibniz’s view that all such
events are internally related to the others, so that implicit in the
fetus are all the experiences of the adult. (This Leibnizian view
relies on the classical theistic, strong notion of omniscience,
wherein God knows in minute detail and with absolute assurance what
will happen in the future.) The Humean view fails to explain the
continuity we experience in our lives and the Leibnizian view fails to
explain the indeterminateness we experience when considering the
future. The truth lies between these two extremes, Hartshorne thinks.
His view of personal identity is based on a conception of time as
asymmetrical in which later events in a person’s life are
internally related to former events, but they are externally related
to those that follow, thus leading to a position that is at once
partially deterministic and partially indeterministic. That is, the
past supplies necessary but not sufficient conditions for human
identity in the present, which always faces a partially indeterminate
future.



Only the first of these methodological devices or procedures supports
the widely held claim that Hartshorne is a rationalist. His overall
method is a complex one that involves the other two methods or
procedures, where he does borrow from the rationalists, but also from
the pragmatists and the Greeks (see Lee 1991; and Dombrowski 1991). It
must be admitted, however, that Hartshorne was educated in a
philosophic world still heavily influenced by late nineteenth and
early twentieth century idealism. (On Hartshorne’s method, see
Peters 1984; and Frankenberry 1991.)


3. The Existence and Actuality of God



Philosophers commonly use a metaphor that suggests that the chain of
an argument, say for the existence of God, is only as strong as its
weakest link. Hartshorne rejects this metaphor on Peircian grounds. He
replaces it by suggesting that various arguments for the existence of
God—ontological, cosmological, design, etc.—are like
mutually reinforcing strands in a cable, as detailed by the Hartshorne
scholar Donald Viney.



He argues that Hume’s and Kant’s criticisms of the
ontological argument of St. Anselm are not directed at the strongest
version of his argument found in 
Proslogion
, chapter 3. Here,
he thinks, there is a modal distinction implied between existing
necessarily and existing contingently. Hartshorne’s view is that
existence alone might not be a real predicate, but existing
necessarily certainly is. To say that something exists without the
possibility of not existing is to say something significant about the
being in question. That is, contra Kant and others, Hartshorne
believes that there are necessary truths concerning existence. To say
that absolute nonexistence in some fashion exists is to contradict
oneself; hence he thinks that absolute nonexistence is unintelligible.
It is necessarily the case that 
something
 exists, he thinks,
and, relying on the ontological argument, he also thinks it true that
God necessarily exists (see Gamwell 2020; also see Reese 1964; and R.
M. Martin 1964).



On Hartshorne’s view, metaphysics does not deal with realities
beyond the physical, but rather with those features of reality that
are ubiquitous or that would exist in any possible world. And he does
not think that it is possible to think of a preeminent being that
existed only contingently since if it did exist contingently rather
than necessarily, it would not be preeminent. That is, God’s
existence is either impossible (positivism) or possible, and, if
possible, then necessary (theism). He is assuming here that there are
three alternatives for us to consider: (1) God is impossible; (2) God
is possible, but may or may not exist; (3) God exists necessarily. The
ontological argument shows that the second alternative makes no sense.
Hence, he thinks that the prime task for the philosophical theist is
to show that God is not impossible (see Goodwin 1978; also see J.
Smith 1984).



A Hartshornian version of the ontological argument can be put as
follows: (1) Even if Kant was correct that existence is not a
predicate, modality of existence is a predicate in the sense that
saying that X exists necessarily or contingently or impossibly, rather
than merely saying that X exists, is to say something or to predicate
something significant about X. (2) There are three (and only three)
modes of existence: (a) impossible (cannot exist); (b) contingent (may
or may not exist--i.e., being such that it exists but might not or
being such that it does not exist but might); and (c) necessary (must
exist). (3) To say that God exists contingently (as in 2b) is to
contradict the logic of perfection (which is Anselm’s great
discovery) because a being that existed only contingently would not be
the greatest conceivable. (4) Therefore, the existence of God--the
greatest conceivable being or a perfect being--is either impossible or
necessary (preliminary conclusion). (5) The existence of God is not
impossible (which is the conclusion from other theistic arguments and
from the history of religious experience). (6) Therefore, the
existence of God is necessary; or, at the very least, the nonexistence
of God is inconceivable (ultimate conclusion). Hartshorne also offered
a version of the argument in formal logic, perhaps the very first to
do so (see Hartshorne 1962; also see Hubbeling 1991).



In addition, Hartshorne’s detailed treatment of the argument
from design is connected to his view of biology. It is hard to
reconcile the idea of an omnipotent, classical theistic God with the
fact of the monstrosities and chance mutations produced in nature, but
the general orderliness of the natural world is just as difficult to
reconcile with there being no Orderer or Persuader at all. Belief in
God as omnipotent, he thinks, has three problems: (1) it is at odds
with the disorderliness in nature; (2) it yields the acutest form of
the theodicy problem; and (3) it conflicts with the notion from
Plato’s 
Sophist
, defended by Hartshorne, that being

is
 dynamic power (
dynamis
). An 
omni
potent
being would ultimately have all power over others, who would
ultimately be powerless. But any being-in-becoming, according to
Hartshorne, has 
some
 power to be affected by others and to
affect others; this power, however slight, provides counterevidence to
a belief in divine omnipotence. In contrast, God is ideally powerful,
on the Hartshornian view. That is, God is as powerful as it is
possible to be, given the partial freedom and power of creatures (see
Birch 1991; and Kuntz 1991).



Hartshorne’s dispute with traditional or classical philosophical
theism concerns not so much the 
existence
 of God, but rather
its assumption that the 
actuality
 of God (i.e., 
how

God exists) could be described in the same terms as the existence of
God. A God who exists necessarily is not necessary or unchanging in
every other respect (e.g., in terms of divine responsiveness to
creaturely changes), he thinks. Although Hartshorne believes that the
medieval thinkers were correct in trying to think through the logic of
perfection, he also thinks that this logic has traditionally been
misapplied in the effort to articulate the attributes of a being
called “God,” roughly defined as the greatest conceivable
being. The traditional or classical theistic logic of perfection sees
God as monopolar in that regarding various contrasts
(permanence-change, one-many, activity-passivity, etc.) the
traditional or classical philosophical theist has chosen one element
in each pair as a divine attribute (the former element of each pair)
and denigrated the other (see Fitch 1964).



By way of contrast, Hartshorne’s logic of perfection is dipolar.
Within each element of these pairs there are good features that should
be attributed in the preeminent sense to God (e.g., excellent
permanence in the sense of steadfastness, excellent change in the
sense of preeminent ability to respond to the sufferings of
creatures). In each element in these pairs there are also invidious
features (e.g., pigheaded stubbornness, fickleness). The task for the
philosophical theist, he thinks, is to attribute the excellences of
both elements of these pairs to God and to eschew the invidious
aspects of both elements. However, it should be noted that

some
 contrasts are not fit for dipolar analysis (e.g.,
good-evil) in that “good good” is a redundancy and
“evil good” is a contradiction. The greatest conceivable
being, he thinks, cannot be evil in any sense whatsoever.



Hartshorne does not claim to believe in two gods, nor does he wish to
defend a cosmological dualism. In fact, we can see that the opposite
is the case when we consider that, in addition to calling his theism

dipolar
, he refers to it as a type of 
panentheism
,
which literally means that all is 
in
 the one God. This
inclusion of the world in God occurs by means of omniscience (as
Hartshorne defines the term) and omnibenevolence. All creaturely
feelings, especially feelings of suffering, are included in the divine
life. God is seen by Hartshorne as the mind or soul for the whole body
of the natural world (see above regarding Plato’s World Soul),
although he thinks of God as distinguishable from the creatures.
Another way to categorize Hartshorne’s theism is to see it as

neoclassical
 in the sense that he relies on the classical or
traditional theistic arguments for the existence of God and on the
classical theistic metaphysics of being as 
first steps
 in the
effort to think through properly the logic of perfection. However,
these efforts need to be supplemented, he thinks, by the efforts of
those who see becoming as more inclusive than being. God is not
outside of time, as in the Boethian view that is influential among
traditional philosophical theists, but rather exists through all of
time, on Hartshorne’s view. On the neoclassical view,
God’s permanent “being” consists in steadfast
benevolence exhibited through everlasting becoming (see Findlay
1964).



God is omniscient, on Hartshorne’s view, but
“omniscience” here refers to the divine ability to know
everything that is knowable: past actualities as already actualized;
present realities to the extent that they are knowable according to
the laws of physics (e.g., what is present epistemically may very well
be the most recent past, given the speed of light); and future
possibilities or probabilities 
as possibilities or
probabilities
. On the traditional or classical conception of
omniscience, however, God has knowledge of future possibilities or
probabilities as already actualized. According to Hartshorne, this is
not an example of supreme knowledge, but is rather an example of
ignorance of the (at least partially) indeterminate character of the
future (see the excellent article Shields and Viney 2003).



The asymmetrical view of time, common to process thinkers in general
(e.g., Bergson, Whitehead, Hartshorne), in which the relationship
between the present and the past is radically different from the
relationship between the present and the future, also has implications
for Hartshorne’s theodicy (see Devlin 1991). A plurality of
partially free agents, including nonhuman ones, facing a future that
is neither completely determined nor foreknown in detail, makes it not
only possible, but likely, that these agents will get in each
other’s way, clash, and cause each other to suffer. On this
view, God is the fellow sufferer who understands.


4. Axiology



Hartshorne views the cosmos as a “metaphysical monarchy,”
with God as the presiding, but not omnipotent, head, and he sees human
society as a “metaphysical democracy,” with each member as
an equal. This makes him a liberal in politics if
“liberalism” refers to the egalitarian belief that none of
us is God. That is, due to the fact of pervasive pluralism of
comprehensive doctrines that citizens affirm, none of us should
presume to act like the classical theistic God by unreasonably
imposing our view of the world on others (see Wild 1964). Although
Hartshorne and Whitehead are both political liberals, Hartshorne is,
despite his view of panpsychist reality as thoroughly social (see
Kegley 1991), more of a libertarian liberal and Whitehead more of a
redistributive liberal (see Morris 1991). In axiology as well as in
metaphysics/theodicy, freedom is crucial, on Hartshorne’s view
(see Kane 1991). Further, Hartshorne’s process view has
implications for fetal development that informs his liberal view
regarding the permissibility of abortion (see Engelhardt 1991).



Hartshorne’s panpsychism (or psychicalism) entails the belief
that each active singular in nature, even those like electrons and
plant cells that exhibit feeling if not mentality, is nonetheless a
center of intrinsic, and not merely instrumental, value. As a result,
Hartshorne’s metaphysics is meant to provide a basis for both an
aesthetic appreciation of the value in nature, as well as for an
environmental ethics where intrinsic and instrumental values in nature
are weighed. In fact, Hartshorne was one of the first philosophers to
write in detail on topics in environmental ethics.



As a published expert on bird song, Hartshorne is the first
philosopher since Aristotle to be an expert in both metaphysics and
ornithology. He writes specifically of the aesthetic categories
required to explain why birds sing outside of mating season and when
territory is not threatened—two occasions for bird song that are
crucial to the behaviorists’ account. Birds 
like
 to
sing, he concludes (see Skutch 1991). His discovery of the
“monotony threshold” regarding bird song is still cited by
ornithologists. Hartshorne’s ornithology thus serves to
highlight the crucial role that aesthetic categories play in
Hartshorne’s philosophy (from the ancient Greek word for
feeling: 
aesthesis
), from the minuscule feelings of
microscopic reality to divine feelings (see Chiaraviglio 1991; Hospers
1991; and Dombrowski 2004).



Hartshorne’s criticism of anthropocentrism is due not only to
his concern for God, but also for beings-in-becoming who experience in
a less sophisticated way than humans. To say that all active singulars
feel—leaving out of the picture abstractions like
“twoness” or insentient composites of active singulars
that do not themselves feel as wholes—is not to say that they
are self-conscious or that they think. As before, however,
Hartshorne’s axiology is ultimately theocentric in character. It
should be noted, however, that Hartshorne has exerted considerable
influence on several scholars of Asian philosophy, including some who
are not theists (see King 1991; Arapura 1991; and Matsunobu 1991).



It should be noted that for Hartshorne the value of a person’s
life does not depend on personal immortality, which he rejects. In
this regard he is unlike many or most theists, including many process
theists. But Hartshorne does not think that death ends all. To believe
in an everlasting God who has perfect memory and who is all-loving
itself constitutes a sort of vicarious life after bodily death, if not
a sort of personal immortality. He calls this view
“contributionism.” To wish for, or perhaps even to expect
as a sort of entitlement, more than this Hartshorne finds hubristic
for biological animals such as ourselves. Further, much of what we
contribute to the divine life is 
present
 happiness (or
unhappiness) and virtue (or vice), thus counteracting the fear that
contributionism compromises the intrinsic value of the experiences in
our lives.


5. Paypsychism or Psychicalism



Hartshorne is well-known for his lifelong defense from the 1920s on of
panpsychism, even when it was not fashionable to do so. His preferred
designation is “psychicalism,” and this for two reasons.
First, this label provides a clearer contrast to
“materialism,” which is the main competitor to this
position. And second, the “pan” component of panpsychism
gives the mistaken impression that mind or psyche can be attributed to

everything
 that exists, in contrast to Hartshorne’s
more modest view that all concrete singulars feel (see Wiehl 1991).
Hartshorne’s psychicalism is very close to Whitehead’s
reformed subjectivism, views that can be based on metaphysical
considerations, psychological reflection, and scientific support.



Like Whitehead, Hartshorne seeks a coherent view that avoids the
bifurcation of nature that has plagued philosophy since at least the
seventeenth century. “Mind” and “matter” are
not two different sorts of reality, but two different ways of
describing the real, with mind, broadly construed, more inclusive than
matter. If it is objected that neural processes, say, are physical
events, Hartshorne would agree in that “physical” in
Hartshorne refers to extended reality, which is compatible with the
claim that physical processes exhibit minimal mentality. By
“minimal mentality” Hartshorne means 
some
 sense
of the contrast between the actual and the possible or, in different
terms, between the past and the future. Ultimately, mind-matter
dualism is unintelligible, as numerous opponents to dualism have
consistently argued, in that all metaphysical dualisms violate a basic
tenet of rationality relating to coherence. There is a radical
inconsistency that is the basis for modern thought, according to
Hartshorne, between the mechanism and determinism of science and the
human world where we feel intensely and have to make decisions.
Materialism is ironically less scientific than psychicalism because
the bifurcation created by materialism encourages human beings to
ignore science in their personal lives in that we cannot live truly
human lives as machines. But for the mechanist both molecules and
human beings blindly run (see Cobb 1991).



Psychicalism is more coherent than dualism because it provides an
intellectual way to 
integrate
 physics as well as psychology,
an integration that is prohibited or made exceedingly difficult in
dualism. By making mind the primary category, matter is not eliminated
but is made a derivative category dealing with dynamic singulars when
they are aggregated. The most important function of psychicalism in
Hartshorne is to avoid the bifurcation of nature without denying a
significant amount of what is given in reality in terms of experience
with qualitative content.



Hartshorne is well aware of the fact that, once the bifurcation of
nature or dualism has been refuted, there is also the dominant view to
contend with: materialism. But there is no way that materialism can
adequately explain the qualitative experiences that we have as a
matter of course. Indeed, materialism leaves experience

un
explained. Further, as Hartshorne sees things, materialism
is actually an emergent type of dualism or a type of dualism in
disguise wherein wholly unfeeling stuff eventually and miraculously
becomes stuff with feeling. That is, materialism is in reality a sort
of bifurcation in time in that there is no way to consistently deny

qualitative experience
 (which is something of a redundancy).
The denial itself is a qualitative experience. In this regard, there
is something half-hearted about materialism (see Wolf 1991).



On Hartshorne’s psychicalist view, by contrast, feeling is not
an addition to matter but the whole of what ultimately makes up the
physical world, even in its most primitive forms. Relying on (and
slightly modifying) Plato’s view (
Sophist
 247E),
Hartshorne holds that being 
is
 the dynamic power to affect
others, and to be affected by others, in however slight a way.



Hartshorne agrees with materialists that we should deny that
“mind” and “physical” are incompatible
predicates. But psychicalism is not only a more coherent alternative
to dualism, it is also superior to materialism because the latter adds
nothing to the description of reality in itself. In fact, it can
achieve coherence only by subtracting much of what we experience as
real. Like materialism, psychicalism is a type of monism when these
two positions are contrasted with dualism. But psychicalism is the
better alternative to dualism, he thinks, in its defense of the
graduated character of mentality, which includes, but is not
terminated at, the level of cells. The superiority of psychicalism to
materialism is largely due to the coherent system of concepts it
offers that includes metaphysics, theology, biology, psychology, and
physics. Some of these fields are in effect omitted or rejected
altogether in materialism and are included in a dualist account in an
incoherent manner. In both materialism and dualism there is a lack of
integration; only in psychicalism is there the possibility of
integration or coherence (see N. Martin 1991).



A common misconception is that, because the psychicalist is committed
to the claim that a minimal form of experiencing is ubiquitous,

everything
 experiences or feels. There are at least two
significant qualifications that are needed. First, 
abstractions
from
 dynamic singulars that feel do not themselves feel, as in
“blueness” or “triangularity” or even the
abstraction “feeling.” Second, 
groups or
aggregates
 of dynamic singulars that feel do not themselves feel
because these are collections rather than true dynamic singulars, as
in tables or crystals or a flock of birds. Nonetheless there can be
activity 
in
 tables or crystals or a flock of birds, even if
these aggregates are themselves inert wholes with active parts. In
this regard, Hartshorne has us notice the abstractness of many of our
pragmatic concepts that are assumed to deal with the most concrete
reality (see J. Smith 1964).



Further, Hartshorne sees trees as collectives or aggregates without
the unity found in either an individual cell or an individual animal
with a central nervous system. That is, “sentient
individual” does not lose its distinctive meaning in
psychicalism in that many things viewed as individuals in everyday
life are really pseudo-individuals. Stones and crowds of people cannot
feel even if their members can. Apparent singulars are composites, in
contrast to true singulars, which can themselves feel as compound
individuals. If something acts as an individual it also feels as an
individual, on Hartshorne’s view, in contrast to the
pseudo-individuals who neither act nor feel 
as individuals

(see Weiss 1984).



The physical things of everyday experience are either aggregates
(metaphysical democracies) or dynamic singulars in their own right
(metaphysical monarchies). In the latter category are to be found
cells and whole persons. Once again, the psychical is not a special
sort of reality, according to Hartshorne, but reality itself in that
dynamic singulars (or actual occasions) feel, however minimally.
Abstract aspects of the psychical do not feel, but these are not so
much exceptions to the rule as abstract aspects of that which is basic
to the real. Some of these dynamic singulars are brought together by a
central nervous system or something like it so as to produce a higher
order singular. Alternatives to psychicalism tend to commit what
Whitehead calls the fallacy of misplaced concreteness, where mere
aggregates of dynamic singulars are taken to be the most concretely
real entities.



Whitehead, in partial contrast to Hartshorne, did not call his
position panpsychism or psychicalism (although he did not object if
others referred to his view as panpsychist). He preferred to call his
view philosophy of organism, with the ultimate units or 
res
verae
 called “actual occasions,” which are gathered
together as “societies” that are either mere aggregates or
compound individuals who exhibit psyche in their own right. Each
actual occasion prehends its past, although some process scholars
prefer to call this ability “mnemonic” rather than in
terms of “memory” in that the latter designation might too
easily be interpreted as a conscious procedure. The Greek

mnema
 is close to Hartshorne’s and Whitehead’s
view because it refers to a memorial or a record that is not
necessarily conscious.



It might be objected that Hartshorne’s psychicalism is an
overuse of an argument from analogy. It might be claimed that
“feeling” or “sentiency” apply only to human
beings or other animals with central nervous systems. On the basis of
this criticism, there is merely a verbal connection when feeling is
attributed “all the way down” in nature.
Hartshorne’s response is to suggest that terms that are used
universally are of necessity very abstract, including psychical terms
associated with feeling or sentiency. It is such abstractness that
enables him to deal with this criticism. All dynamic singulars have

some
 sense of the past (in terms of physical feeling or
prehension) and 
some
 sense of the future (in terms of
primitive mentality or possibility). There are two extremes to be
avoided: that we could completely capture others’ feelings, on
the one hand, and that we are completely in the dark regarding
others’ feelings, on the other. However remote the analogy may
be, it never completely lapses (see Ogden 1984).



Hartshorne’s psychicalism is based not only on metaphysical
considerations or on an argument from analogy, but also on personal
experience, which takes one to sentiency at the microscopic level.
This means that the human body is not entirely disanalogous to the
rest of nature. Granted, many characteristics of psyche cannot be
generalized, such as consciousness or thinking (see W. Viney 1991).
Hence, another label for Hartshorne’s view (derived from David
Ray Griffin) is panexperientialism, 
not
 panconsciousness.
Hartshorne thinks it crucial to point out that psychicalism is not so
much an (illegitimate) extension of human traits like feeling as a
movement 
away from
 human traits like consciousness and
advanced thinking. He has us notice that pleasure and pain are

localized
, as in good food on the tongue or sexual
excitement, on the one hand, or a toothache or a stubbed toe, on the
other. We literally sympathize or feel with the enjoyments or negative
experiences of cells in our bodies. In effect, one feels previous
suffering at the cellular level. These cells have rapport with each
other, otherwise psychosomatic illness might be very difficult to
explain. All pain involves damage to cells. Pain is an instance of the
psychical that is just as revelatory of the real as experiences we
have via sight, although cells in the eye also have feelings of a
primitive sort.



In the trilemma treated by Hartshorne (some form of dualism, some form
of materialism, or some form of psychicalism, three alternatives that
Hartshorne sees as logically exhaustive), psychicalism is often
dismissed as absurd. The fact that personal experience takes us to
sentiency at the microscopic level effectively counteracts this
alleged absurdity, as Hartshorne sees things. Hurt my cells and you
hurt 
me
, he holds. Further, psychicalism is not odd in being
a metaphysical view because materialism and dualism are also
metaphysical views. The materialist is saying, whether explicitly or
implicitly, that 
the
 real is purely material with psyche
being, at best, an epiphenomenal shadow reality.



It is interesting from a Hartshornian point of view that cells can
absorb food even though they do not have stomachs, they can absorb
oxygen without lungs, they can reproduce without sexual organs, and
they can flee intruders without legs. From this evidence he thinks
that it is legitimate to attribute sentience to them without a central
nervous system present. The mind-body relation in us and in other
animals with central nervous systems is one that is participatory in
that we are able to refeel through memory and perception what was felt
at the cellular level. Qualities as well as abstract structures are
given in experience, with the qualitative experiences of cells given
more directly than those at the atomic level. As before, to think that
the experiences of cells appear miraculously out of inert lifeless
stuff strikes Hartshorne as unbelievable. If one cuts one’s
finger and it hurts, the experience of pain is both one’s own
and not one’s own in that the damaged cells in one’s
finger have their own lives that are partially independent of what one
is as a whole individual.



Relying on the psychologist Gustav Fechner, Hartshorne distinguishes
between monadological psyche at the microscopic level and
synechological psyche at the level of compound individuals like us
with sentiency per se. Our own synechological experiences are filtered
through monadological psyche, including the experiences of nerve
cells. What are fundamental are feelings, activity, dynamism. We feel
feelings and we experience experiences. This is because “mere
matter” refers to very low levels of psyche. This widespread
sharing in the feelings of others indicates Hartshorne’s
distance from Hume’s denial that one experience can really share
in the experience of another that causally influences it. It is
precisely such influence that is given in a later experience in
relation to an earlier one. Unlike Fechner, however, Hartshorne does
not attribute synechological psyche to plants, which as wholes have
less integration than even the cells that constitute them.



It is surprising that Hartshorne enlists Kant in the defense of
psychicalism. In his 
Dreams of a Spirit-Seer
, Kant rebukes
those who ridicule Leibniz’s panpsychism. 
If
 we had to
find a positive concept of reality in-itself, Leibniz points the way
(see Loemker 1964). Either we remain agnostic regarding
things-in-themselves (Kant’s own view) or we hold with Leibniz
that things-
in-themselves
 are psychical individuals
(Hartshorne’s view). In a sense, the most viable alternative to
psychicalism, on this view, is not so much materialism but agnosticism
regarding things-in-themselves. What resembles no aspect of experience
is bare nothing rather than some thing-in-itself. The
“qualities” of sheer material beings would of necessity be
quite unknown to us. What is needed, by contrast, is a view that
accommodates the continuity among qualities in various types of
psyche.



Like Plato, Hartshorne sees psyche as a sort of self-motion, an
activity that is found throughout nature. The fallacy of division
occurs when the inert characteristics of an aggregate are assumed to
apply to members of the group, as when the complete lack of feeling in
a stone is assumed to apply to molecular 
activities
 in the
stone. And the fallacy of composition occurs when the activities in
members of a group are assumed to apply to the group as a whole. The
key contrast within psychicalism is that between the singular and the
composite, which creates the need to think through carefully the
relations between these contrasting features.



In a way, pre-literate animists were on the right track, as are
children and Romantic poets like William Wordsworth, in tending toward
psychicalism. The possible defects in these proto-psychicalists are
not responded to adequately by seeing them as “primitive”
and in need of correction by “common sense,” which should
no more be legislative in metaphysics than it is in science. Both
psychicalism and contemporary science, in contrast to common sense,
see dynamism throughout the microscopic world. The pure materialist
absolutizes the anthropocentric biases of ordinary language.
Psychicalism tries to transcend these biases (see Ogden 1964).



Reality is composed of pulses of experience, on Hartshorne’s
psychicalist view. The data of human experience, for example, are
themselves experiences, the clearest cases of which are memories and
perceptions, most especially experiences of pleasure and pain. Our
experiences exhibit both independence and dependence on the
experiences of cells in our own bodies. This dependence is called
“prehension” by Hartshorne, who relies here on Whitehead
(see Ford 1991). Contra Hume, what we experience are previous
instances of experience that have a causal influence on us. To doubt
that we experience the past is to doubt everything, on Hartshorne
view, in that experience itself is internally related to the past, but
is externally related to the future, on the asymmetrical view of time
prevalent in process philosophy.



Hartshorne goes so far as to say that the participation in each
other’s being found in prehension is his strongest belief in
that the mind-body relation is clearly social. The perceived precedes
the perceiving by providing necessary but not sufficient conditions
for what comes next. That is, events do not necessitate their precise
successors, even if some successors or other are required.



If metaphysics is seen, as it is by Hartshorne, as the study of
nonrestrictive existential statements, then “something
exists” and “experience exists” are metaphysical
statements because of their extreme range. They are statements that
cannot be denied without contradiction. That is, psychicalism is
metaphysically true rather than contingently true or false (see H.
Smith 1964). But this does not mean that there is an incompatibility
between psychicalism and the contingently true or false deliverances
in science. It is understandable why scientists restrict their
investigations to what can be quantified and hence be capable of
precise measurement. But such restriction is nonetheless compatible
with psychicalism as a sort of comparative psychology of the widest
sort, with physics dealing with the simplest instances of psyche or
with the behavioristic aspect of the lowest instances of psyche.
Whereas science is concerned with the control of nature, philosophy,
according to Hartshorne, should be concerned with the most general
sort of 
understanding
 of nature.



A further connection between psychicalism and science can be seen in
terms of Kant’s rejection of psychicalism as being due in part
to the materialistic and mechanistic physics of his day. In principle,
scientists today could be psychicalists and some of them were in fact
psychicalists, as in Hartshorne’s friend at University of
Chicago, the geneticist Sewall Wright (see Wright 1964). Science deals
with structure, not quality, yet without qualitative feeling,
structures are empty. Only psychicalism generalizes both structure as
well as feeling. The physical 
is
 the psychical when
considered only in its causal relations and structures, abstracting
away from qualitative aspects.



Hartshorne’s generalized concept of sentience is integrally
connected to his commitment to process philosophy, to the primacy of
becoming over being. Without memory and anticipation,
“past” and “future” would be meaningless
words. In fact, if time is a universal feature of the real, then
psychicalism is required, otherwise time could easily be reduced to
(static) space. If an electron, say, does not have memory per se it
nonetheless exhibits present behavior in some sort of prehensive
relationship with the past that influences it (see Sprigge 1991). A
reductionistic view of nature purely in spatial terms plays into the
hands of the dualist or the materialist. No positive conception of
time can be derived from dead matter or matter that can neither
remember nor anticipate. If all dynamic singulars are some type of
experience, each of these unities has 
some
 type of memory
(prehension) and anticipation, otherwise an objective temporal order
is inexplicable (see Levi 1964).



Hartshorne’s psychicalism is also connected to his theism,
although some scholars like Wright adopt his psychicalism without
agreeing to his theism. Hartshorne holds that psychicalism is implicit
in theism, at least if God is seen as psyche that animates not this or
that particular body but that animates omnipresently the body of the
universe (see Viney and Dombrowski forthcoming). God is the supreme
experience in relation to particular experiences on the model of
soul-body cosmic hylomorphism. Mere matter or a zero of feeling is a
complete negation that can be approached only asymptotically. Thus,
psychicalism is, as Hartshorne sees things, a scientific sort of
spiritualism. Dead matter, if such existed, would be at odds with an
ubiquitous, living God. Hartshorne goes so far as to claim that
without psychicalism theism is incoherent and vice versa (see Van der
Veken 1991).


6. Critical Evaluation



It seems fair to say that analytic philosophers, in general, even
analytic philosophers who are theists, have largely ignored
Hartshorne’s philosophy. (The point is debateable. There has
been a move among many analytic philosophers who are theists, as in
Richard Swinburne, away from the eternal, Boethian God who is outside
of time altogether. Might it be that Hartshorne’s influence is
greater than initially appears to be the case when the temporality, or
the sempiternity, of the God of many analytic philosophers is
concerned?) This is in contrast to his wide influence among
theologians, which is odd when it is considered that he is not a
theologian and does not rely on sacred scripture or religious
authority for his insights. Another oddity is the fact that
Hartshorne’s influence among theologians is due to the defense
he offers of the 
rationality
 of belief in a neoclassical God
(see R. M. Martin 1984; and Shields 2003a).



There is at least one important philosopher whose work indicates the
sort of debate that has occurred between Hartshorne and analytic
theists, who tend to rely on traditional or classical versions of the
concept of God. That is William Alston. There are two reasons why an
evaluation of Hartshorne’s philosophy is facilitated by a
consideration of Alston’s critique. First, Alston is as
important a theist as any among analytic philosophers and his
criticisms of Hartshorne’s thought are like those of other
analytic philosophers like Thomas Morris, Richard Creel, Michael
Durrant, and others. And second, Alston is a former student of
Hartshorne’s and is thoroughly familiar with Hartshorne’s
arguments. Alston is a philosopher who is not scandalized by
Hartshorne’s panentheism, nor by his neoclassical theism. But
Alston thinks that the contrast that Hartshorne draws between his
neoclassical theism and the classical theism of Thomas Aquinas is too
sharp.



Alston thinks that Hartshorne presents neoclassical theism and
classical theism as complete packages, whereas it would be better to
be able to pick and choose among individual items within these
packages. Alston seeks some sort of rapprochement between Thomism and
neoclassical theism, a rapprochement that Hartshorne himself would
like to bring about to the extent that he is a neo
classical

thinker, but that is difficult to accomplish to the extent that he is

neo
classical (see McMurrin 1991).



A consideration of ten contrasting attributes will best facilitate an
initial understanding of Hartshorne’s view of God. Consider the
first group of attributes treated by Alston.








CLASSICAL ATTRIBUTES


NEOCLASSICAL ATTRIBUTES
 




1. absoluteness (absence of internal relatedness)


1. relativity (God is internally related to creatures by way of
knowledge of them and actions toward them)
 




2. pure actuality (there is no potentiality in God)


2. potentiality (not everything is actualized that is possible
for God)
 




3. total necessity (every truth about God is necessarily
true)


3. necessity and contingency (God exists necessarily, but
various things are true of God contingently, e.g., God’s
knowledge of what is contingent)
 




4. absolute simplicity


4. complexity
 
 





Alston distinguishes two lines of argument regarding absoluteness and
relativity, which he sees as the key contrast. Alston thinks that only
one of these is successful. As indicated in the diagram above, what
Hartshorne means by absoluteness is absence of internal relatedness. A
relation is internal to a term of a relation just in case that term
would not be exactly as it is if it were not in that relationship.
Hartshorne’s view is that God has internal relations to
creatures by way of knowing and acting towards them and receiving
influence from them.



On Alston’s interpretation, Hartshorne’s first line of
argument is to say that if the relation of the absolute to the world
really fell outside the absolute, then this relation would necessarily
fall within some further and genuinely single entity that embraced
both the absolute and the world and the relations between them. Thus,
we must hold, according to Hartshorne, that the God-creature relation
is internal to God; otherwise we will have to admit that there is
something greater or more inclusive than God. Alston does not find
this argument convincing because it includes the claim that God
“contains” the world due to the internal relations God has
with the world. Alston’s view is that the entity to which a
relation is internal contains the terms only in the minimal sense that
those terms enter into a description of the entity, but it does not
follow from this that those terms are contained in that entity in an
organic way.



Divine inclusiveness, for Hartshorne, is sometimes like the inclusion
of thoughts in a mind, but usually it is described as like the
inclusion of cells within a living body. It is never like the
inclusion of marbles in a box. The inorganic and insentient character
of a box is inadequate as a model for divinity, he thinks, and divine
inclusiveness is never like the inclusion of theorems in a set of
axioms, as it might be for certain idealists. Divine inclusiveness in
Hartshorne is 
organic
 inclusiveness (see Reese 1991).



Hartshorne’s second argument against absoluteness fares much
better, according to Alston. He agrees with Hartshorne’s stance
regarding the cognitive relation God has with the world; in any case
of knowledge, the knowledge relation is internal to the subject,
external to the object. When a human being knows something, the fact
that she knows it is part of what makes her the concrete being that
she is. If she recognizes a certain tree she is different from the
being she might have been if she had not recognized the tree. But the
tree is unaffected by her recognition. Likewise, according to Alston,
one cannot maintain that God has perfect knowledge of everything
knowable and still hold that God is not qualified to any degree by
relations with other beings (see Shields and Viney 2003).



One might respond to Alston and Hartshorne on this point by saying
that since creatures depend for their existence on God, their
relations to God affect 
them
, but not God. Richard Creel
seems to make this very point. But even if beings other than God
depend for their existence on God, it still remains true that if God
had created a different world from the one that exists at present,
then God would be somewhat different from the way God is at present:
God’s knowledge would have been of 
that
 world and not
this one, according to both Alston and Hartshorne.



Alston’s concessions to Hartshorne’s concept of God extend
to contrasts 2–4. The above argument for the internal
relatedness of God (as cognitive subject) to the world presupposes
that there are alternative possibilities for God, and if there are
alternative possibilities for divine knowledge then this implies that
there are unrealized potentialities for God. 
Pure
 actuality
and 
total
 necessity cannot be defended as divine attributes,
according to Alston and Hartshorne. Alston’s version of
Hartshorne’s argument goes as follows:



(1) (a) “God knows that W exists” entails (b) “W
exists.”



(2) If (a) were necessary, (b) would be necessary.



(3) But (b) is contingent.



(4) Hence (a) is contingent.





We can totally exclude contingency from God only by denying God any
knowledge of anything contingent, a step that not even traditional or
classical theists wish to take. Contrast 4 must also be treated in a
dipolar way in that the main support for a doctrine of pure divine
simplicity is the absence of any unrealized potentialities in God.



In sum, Alston and Hartshorne agree on contrasts 1–4, except for
the fact that Hartshorne’s concept of divine inclusiveness, in
contrast to Alston’s, is organic in character.



Regarding a second group of attributes, however, Alston and many other
theists who are analytic philosophers diverge from Hartshorne rather
significantly:








CLASSICAL ATTRIBUTES


NEOCLASSICAL ATTRIBUTES
 




5. creation 
ex nihilo
 by a free act of will; God could
have refrained from creating anything


5. both God and the world of creatures exist necessarily,
although the details are contingent
 




6. omnipotence (God has the power to do anything God wills to do
that is logically consistent)


6. God has all the power one agent could have given
metaphysical, in addition to logical, limitations
 




7. incorporeality


7. corporeality (the world is the body of God)
 




8. nontemporality (God does not live through a series of
moments)


8. temporality (God lives through temporal succession, but
everlastingly)
 




9. immutability (God cannot change because God is not temporally
successive)


9. mutability (God is continually attaining richer syntheses of
experience)
 




10. absolute perfection (God is eternally that than which no
more perfect can be conceived)


10. relative perfection (at any moment God is more perfect than
any other, but God is self-surpassing at a later stage of
development)
 
 





Concerning contrast 5, Alston takes creation 
ex nihilo
 to be
fundamental to theism because it has deep roots in religious
experience. He thinks that to say that God has unrealized
potentialities and contingent properties is not to say that God

must
 be in relation with some world of entities other than
God. Alston admits that Hartshorne legitimately points out some of the
internal contradictions contained in the classical theistic version of
creation 
ex nihilo
, but he claims that there is no connection
drawn by Hartshorne between divine creation and metaphysical
principles regarding relativity, contingency, and potentiality.
Alston’s belief seems to be that those who accept creation

ex nihilo
 are not saying that there is absolutely nothing at
any stage: there is God. Rather, creation 
ex nihilo
 only
means that there is nothing out of which God creates the universe.
Here Alston seems to agree with Norman Kretzmann, Eleonore Stump, and
most other theists who are analytic philosophers.



Alston’s stance here is problematic for two reasons, from
Hartshorne’s point of view. First, although belief in

some
 sort of divine creativity has deep roots in the history
of religious experience, it is not clear that these roots have to tap
into creation 
ex nihilo
. For example, it is not clear that
creation 
ex nihilo
 is the sort of creation described in
Genesis, in that when the Bible starts with the statement that the
spirit of God hovered above the waters, one gets the impression that
both God and the aqueous muck had been around forever. If one believes
in creation 
ex nihilo
, however, as Alston does, one might
nonetheless claim that creation 
ex nihilo
 does not
necessarily mean a temporal beginning to the act of creation. But even
on this hypothesis there are problems, and this would seem to be
Hartshorne’s second point. If Plato and Hartshorne are correct
that being 
is
 dynamic power, then the sort of unlimited power
implied by creation 
ex nihilo
 is impossible. Hartshorne would
argue, contra Alston, that there is a connection between belief in
creation 
ex hyle
 (as opposed to creation 
ex nihilo
)
and the metaphysical principle that being is dynamic power. Creation

ex nihilo
, Hartshorne thinks, is a convenient fiction
invented in the first centuries B.C.E. and C.E. in order to exalt
divine power, but it is not the only sort of creation that religious
believers have defended, nor is it defensible if being is dynamic
power (see Boyce Gibson 1964).



Concerning contrast 6, Alston claims that belief in creation 
ex
nihilo
 and belief in divine omnipotence are separate beliefs such
that to argue against the former is not necessarily to argue against
the latter. Hartshorne tries to do too much, he thinks, with the claim
that being is power when he uses this claim to argue against divine
omnipotence. According to Alston, God can have 
unlimited

power, power to do anything that God wills to do, without having

all
 power in that, if being is power, the creatures also have
some power.



On Hartshorne’s interpretation of Alston, however, God can have
ideal power, but not all power, because in addition to divine power
there are the existences of others with powers of their own. Although
God does not have all power, Hartshorne thinks that on Alston’s
view God 
could
 have all power. In effect, what Alston has
done, according to Hartshorne, is reduce his stance regarding divine
omnipotence to that regarding creation 
ex nihilo
 in that the
claim that God could have all power is due to the prior belief that
God brings everything into existence out of absolutely nothing, a
belief that Alston thinks has to be the traditional one and in point
of fact is intelligible. It is not quite clear to Hartshorne, however,
that it is unquestionably the traditional one, nor is it clear to him
that we can develop an intelligible concept of “absolutely
nothing.”



Hartshorne’s Platonic or Bergsonian argument against creation

ex nihilo
, in simplified form, looks something like this: one
can in fact imagine the nonexistence of this or that, or even of this
or that class of things, a fact that gives some the confidence to
(erroneously) think that this process can go on infinitely such that
one could imagine a state in which there was “absolutely
nothing.” However, not every verbally possible statement is made
conceptually cogent by even the most generous notion of
“conceptual,” according to Hartshorne. At the specific,
ordinary, empirical level negative instances are possible (e.g., this
corkscrew is not a dog), but at the generic, metaphysical level only
positive instances are possible (e.g., something must exist), on this
view. The sheer absence of reality cannot conceivably be experienced,
he thinks, for if it were experienced an existing experiencer would be
presupposed.



Contrast 7 deals with divine embodiment. Alston is willing to grant
that God is embodied in two senses: (1) God is aware, with maximal
immediacy, of what goes on in the world; and (2) God can directly
affect what happens in the world. That is, Alston defends a limited
version of divine embodiment, similar to that defended by Richard
Swinburne. However, Alston is sceptical regarding a stronger version
of divine embodiment wherein the world exists by metaphysical
necessity such that God 
must
 animate it. Alston is willing to
accept the idea that God has a body, but 
only if
 having such
a body is on God’s terms. It seems that this weaker version of
divine embodiment defended by Alston, as opposed to Hartshorne’s
stronger version wherein there is essential corporeality in God,
stands or falls with the defense of creation 
ex nihilo
. In
fact, despite Alston’s desire to examine each contrast
individually, as opposed to Hartshorne’s stark contrast between
classical theistic attributes (all ten of them) and neoclassical
attributes (all ten of them), he ends up linking his criticisms of
Hartshorne regarding contrasts 5–7, at the very least. All three
of these classical theistic attributes stand together only with a
defensible version of creation 
ex nihilo
.



Contrasts 8–9, concerning nontemporality and immutability, are
also linked by Alston. He concedes that if God is temporal, Hartshorne
has offered us the best version to date of what divine temporality and
divine mutability would be like. Alston dismisses as idle the view
that God could remain completely unchanged through a succession of
temporal moments, but this admission still leaves us, he thinks, with
the following conditional statement: “God undergoes change

if
 God is in time.” Alston’s critique of
Hartshorne’s view also consists in a refusal to grant that
contingency and temporality are coextensive in the way mutability and
temporality are. Alston believes, contra Hartshorne, that God can be
in some way contingent (that any relation in which God stands to the
world might have been otherwise) and still be nontemporal.



Alston knows that the notion of a nontemporal God who is nonetheless
qualified by relation to temporal beings will strike Hartshorne as
unintelligible. Alston’s attempt to make his position
intelligible rests on his own Thomistic-Whiteheadian stance, or
better, on his Thomistic or Boethian interpretation of Whitehead
(strange as this seems); Alston is also influenced here by Eleanore
Stump and Norman Kretzmann. We should not think of God as involved in
process or becoming of any sort. The best temporal analogy, he thinks,
for this conception is an unextended instant or an “eternal
now.” For Alston this does not commit one, however, as
Hartshorne would allege, to a static deity frozen in immobility. On
the contrary, according to Alston, God is eternally active in ways
that do not require temporal succession. God’s acts can be
complete in an instant. Alston includes God’s acts of knowledge,
a stance that at least seems to conflict with one of the concessions
he made to Hartshorne regarding the first group of attributes (see
Neville 1991).



The Boethian-Thomistic notion of the specious present for God, on the
analogue of a human being’s perceiving some temporally extended
stretch of a process in one temporally indivisible act, is also
defended by Alston. For example, one can perceive the flight of a bee
“all at once” without first perceiving the first half of
the stretch of flight and then perceiving the second. One’s
perception can be without temporal succession even if the object of
one’s perception is, in fact, temporally successive (see Gale
2003). All we have to do, on Alston’s view, is expand our
specious present to cover all of time and we have a model for
God’s awareness of the world. This is a much more difficult
project for Hartshorne to imagine than it is for Alston. Apparently
Alston thinks that it is easy to conceptualize God
“seeing” Neanderthal man (or Adam), Moses, Jesus, and
Dorothy Day all at once in their immediacy. Here Alston has a view
similar to that of William Mann.



But even if it were possible to have nonsuccessive 
awareness

of a vast succession, which Hartshorne would deny, it is even more
implausible, from Hartshorne’s point of view, to claim, as does
Alston, that God could have nonsuccessive 
responses
 to stages
of that succession. It might make more sense for Alston to say
“indesponses” or “presponses” rather than
“responses,” as Creel would urge.



It is correct of Alston to notice that there is no loss in God, but
this is not incompatible with God’s temporality, according to
Hartshorne. There can be succession in God without there being loss or
perishing due to the fact that God’s inheritance of what happens
in the world and God’s memory are ideal. Hartshorne thinks that
the future is incomplete and indeterminate for God as well as from our
limited perspective. Alston, by way of contrast, wants to defend a God
who is not strictly necessary in actuality, but is contingent,

despite the fact that
 God does not undergo temporal change,
nor is God fluent. Hartshorne’s defenders, by way of contrast,
think that one of the greatest virtues of process thinking is its
effort to eliminate what they see as such self-contradiction in
philosophical theology.



Alston’s treatment of contrast 10, concerning absolute versus
relative perfection, follows from what he has said regarding contrasts
8–9. Relative perfection in God, as opposed to absolute
perfection, has a point only for a temporal being; hence God is
absolutely perfect, according to Alston. A being that does not
successively assume different states could not possibly surpass
itself. Here, once again, Alston engages in linkage, thereby, at the
very least, confirming Hartshorne’s belief that we need both to
consider the divine attributes together and to determine whether the
classical theist’s linkage or the neoclassical theist’s
linkage is more defensible. For the most part, Alston opts for
classical theism. Or more precisely, he thinks that the strongest
concept of God is acquired when we take a modified version of the
neoclassical attributes in contrasts 1–4 and combine them with
the classical attributes in contrasts 5–10.



This rapproachement in Alston between classical theism and
neoclassical theism is a step beyond James Ross’s belief that
these are two competing descriptions of God at an impasse. Hartshorne
partially agrees with Ross. Neoclassical, dipolar theism

already
 includes the best insights of classical theism, he
thinks. For this and other reasons, Hartshorne thinks that there are
rich possibilities for progress in philosophy in the future made
available through neoclassical theism (see Rescher 2003; and Shields
2009).



From Hartshorne’s point of view the linkage of attributes

within
 the first group and 
within
 the second group
needs to be corrected by a greater concern for reticulating the
attributes in these two groups. He thinks that an explanation is
needed regarding how Alston can be committed to both monopolar and
dipolar theism. For example, Alston ends up defending the view that
God is changed by the objects God knows (pace the neoclassical,
dipolar attributes), but these are not changes that occur in time
(pace the classical, monopolar attributes). It is one thing,
Hartshorne thinks, to say that God exists in a nontemporal specious
present, and it is another to say that God is changed by temporal
beings in a nontemporal specious present. The former view is at least
problematic, he thinks, and the latter seems to be part of the
traditional classical theistic view wherein, from a Hartshornian
perspective, inconsistency goes in the guise of mystery.






Bibliography


Books by Hartshorne




(1923) “An Outline and Defense of the Argument for the Unity
of Being in the Absolute or Divine Good,” Ph.D. Dissertation,
Harvard University.


(1934) 
The Philosophy and Psychology of Sensation
,
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.


(1937) 
Beyond Humanism
, Chicago: Willet, Clark, and
Co.


(1941) 
Man’s Vision of God
, N.Y.: Harper and
Brothers.


(1948) 
The Divine Relativity
, New Haven: Yale University
Press.


(1953) 
Reality as Social Process
, Boston: Beacon
Press.


(1953) 
Philosophers Speak of God
, Chicago: University of
Chicago Press; reprinted Amherst, NY: Humanity Books, 2000.


(1962) 
The Logic of Perfection
, LaSalle, Il.: Open
Court.


(1967) 
A Natural Theology for Our Time
, LaSalle, Il: Open
Court.


(1967) 
Anselm’s Discovery
, LaSalle, Il.: Open
Court.


(1970) 
Creative Synthesis and Philosophic Method
,
LaSalle, Il.: Open Court.


(1972) 
Whitehead’s Philosophy
, Lincoln: University
of Nebraska Press.


(1973) 
Born to Sing
, Bloomington: Indiana University
Press.


(1976) 
Aquinas to Whitehead
, Milwaukee: Marquette
University Press.


(1983) 
Insights and Oversights of Great Thinkers
, Albany:
State University of New York Press.


(1984) 
Creativity in American Philosophy
, Albany: State
University of New York Press.


(1984) 
Existence and Actuality: Conversations with Charles
Hartshorne
, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.


(1984) 
Omnipotence and Other Theological Mistakes
,
Albany: State University of New York Press.


(1987) 
Wisdom as Moderation
, Albany: State University of
New York Press.


(1990) 
The Darkness and the Light
, Albany: State
University of New York Press.


(1991) 
The Philosophy of Charles Hartshorne
, LaSalle,
Il.: Open Court.


(1997) 
The Zero Fallacy and Other Essays in Neoclassical
Metaphysics
, LaSalle, Il.: Open Court.


(2011) 
Creative Experiencing
, Albany: State University of
New York Press.




Secondary Sources




Alston, William, 1964, “The Elucidation of Religious
Statements,” in 
Process and Divinity: The Hartshorne
Festschrift
, LaSalle, Il.: Open Court, pp. 429–443.


–––, 1989, “Hartshorne and Aquinas: A Via
Media,” in 
Divine Nature and Human Language
, Ithaca:
Cornell University Press, pp. 121–143.


Arapura, John, 1991, “Hartshorne’s Response to
Vedanta,” in Hahn (ed.) 1991, pp. 253–269.


Auxier, Randall (ed.), 2001, 
Hartshorne and Brightman on God,
Process, and Persons
, Nashville: Vanderbilt University
Press.


Birch, Charles, 1991, “Chance, Purpose, and
Darwinism,” in Hahn (ed.) 1991, pp. 51–63.


Boyce Gibson, A., 1964, “The Two Strands in Natural
Theology,” in Reese and Freeman (eds.) 1964, pp.
471–492.


Chiaraviglio, Lucio, 1991, “Hartshorne’s Aesthetic
Theory of Intelligence,” in Hahn (ed.) 1991, pp.
77–90.


Cobb, John, 1984, “Overcoming Reductionism,” in Cobb
and Gamwell (eds.) 1984, pp. 149–164.


Cobb, John and Franklin Gamwell (eds.), 1984, 
Existence and
Actuality: Conversations with Charles Hartshorne
, Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.


Devlin James, 1991, “Hartshorne’s Metaphysical
Asymmetry,” in Hahn (ed.) 1991, pp. 275–290.


Dombrowski, Daniel, 1988, 
Hartshorne and the Metaphysics of
Animal Rights
, Albany: State University of New York Press.


–––, 1991, “Hartshorne and Plato,”
in Hahn (ed.) 1991, pp. 465–487.


–––, 1996, 
Analytic Theism, Hartshorne, and
the Concept of God
, Albany: State University of New York
Press.


–––, 2004, 
Divine Beauty: The Aesthetics of
Charles Hartshorne
, Nashville: Vanderbilt University Press.


–––, 2005, 
A Platonic Philosophy of
Religion
, Albany: State University of New York Press.


–––, 2006, 
Rethinking the Ontological
Argument: A Neoclassical Theistic Response
, New York: Cambridge
University Press.


–––, 2016, 
A History of the Concept of God:
A Process Approach
, Albany: State University of New York
Press.


–––, 2019, 
Process Philosophy and Political
Liberalism: Rawls, Whitehead, and Hartshorne
, Edinburgh:
Edinburgh University Press.


Engelhardt, Tristram, 1991, “Natural Theology and
Bioethics,” in Hahn (ed.) 1991, pp. 159–168.


Fitch, Frederic, 1964, “The Perfection of Perfection,”
in Reese and Freeman (eds.) 1964, pp. 529–532.


Ford, Lewis (ed.), 1973, 
Two Process Philosophers
,
Tallahassee: American Academy of Religion.


–––, 1991, “Hartshorne’s
Interpretation of Whitehead,” in Hahn (ed.) 1991, pp.
313–337.


Frankenberry, Nancy, 1991, “Hartshorne’s Method in
Metaphysics,” in Hahn (ed.) 1991, pp. 291–312.


Gale, Richard, 2003, “Disanalogies between Space and
Time,” in Shields (ed.) 2003, pp. 97–117.


Gamwell, Franklin, 2020, 
On Metaphysical Necessity
,
Albany: State University of New York Press.


Gilroy, John, 1989, “Hartshorne and the Ultimate Issue in
Metaphysics,” 
Process Studies
, 18: 38–56.


Goodwin, George, 1978, 
The Ontological Argument of Charles
Hartshorne
, Missoula: Scholars Press.


Griffin, David Ray, 2001, 
Reenchantment without
Supernaturalism
, Ithaca: Cornell University Press.


Gunton, Colin, 1978, 
Becoming and Being: The Doctrine of God
in Charles Hartshorne and Karl Barth
, Oxford: Oxford University
Press.


Hahn, Lewis (ed.), 1991, 
The Philosophy of Charles
Hartshorne
, LaSalle, IL: Open Court.


Hospers, John, 1991, “Hartshorne’s Aesthetics,”
in Hahn (ed.) 1991, pp. 113–134.


Hubbeling, Hubertus, 1991, “Hartshorne and the Ontological
Argument,” in Hahn (ed.) 1991, pp. 355–376.


Kane, Robert, 1991, “Free Will, Determinism, and Creativity
in Hartshorne’s Thought,” in Hahn (ed.) 1991, pp.
135–155.


Kegley, Jacquelyn, 1991, “The Divine Relativity and the
Beloved Community,” in Hahn (ed.) 1991, pp. 215–233.


King, Sallie, 1991, “Buddhism and Hartshorne,” in Hahn
(ed.) 1991, pp. 235–252.


Kuntz, Paul, 1991, “Charles Hartshorne’s Theory of
Order and Disorder,” in Hahn (ed.) 1991, pp. 415–430.


Lee, Donald, 1991, “Hartshorne and Pragmatic
Metaphysics,” in Hahn (ed.) 1991, pp. 529–549.


Levi, Albert William, 1964, “Bergson or Whitehead?,”
in Reese and Freeman (eds.) 1964, pp. 139–159.


Loemker, Leroy, 1964, “On Substance and Process in
Leibniz,” in Reese and Freeman (eds.) 1964, pp.
403–425.


Lucas, George, 1991, “Hartshorne and the Development of
Process Philosophies,” in Hahn (ed.) 1991, pp.
509–527.


Mann, William, 1983, “Simplicity and Immutability in
God,” 
International Philosophical Quarterly
, 23:
267–276.


Martin, Norman, 1991, “Taking Creativity Seriously: Some
Observations of the Logical Structure of Hartshorne’s
Philosophy,” in Hahn (ed.) 1991, pp. 339–353.


Martin, R. M., 1964, “Ontology, Category-Words, and Modal
Logic,” in Reese and Freeman (eds.) 1964, pp. 271-284.


–––, 1984, “On the Language of Theology:
Hartshorne and Quine,” in Cobb and Gamwell (eds.) 1984, pp.
43–66.


Matsunobu, Keiji, 1991, “Charles Hartshorne’s
Impression on the Kyoto School,” in Hahn (ed.) 1991, pp.
557–565.


McMurrin Sterling, 1991, “Hartshorne’s Critique of
Classical Metaphysics and Theology,” in Hahn (ed.) 1991, pp.
431–443.


Morris, Randall, 1991, 
Process Philosophy and Political
Ideology
, Albany: State University of New York Press.


Neville, Robert, 1991, “Time, Temporality, and
Ontology,” in Hahn (ed.) 1991, pp. 377–395.


Ogden, Schubert, 1964, “Bultmann’s Demythologizing and
Hartshorne’s Dipolar Theism,” in Reese and Freeman (eds.)
1964, pp. 493–513.


–––, 1984, “The Experience of God:
Critical Reflections on Hartshorne’s Theory of Analogy,”
in Cobb and Gamwell (eds.) 1984, pp. 16–37.


Peters, Eugene, 1970, 
Hartshorne and Neoclassical
Metaphysics
, Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press.


–––, 1984, “Methodology in the Metaphysics
of Charles Hartshorne,” in Cobb and Gamwell (eds.) 1984, pp.
1–11.


Reese, William, 1964, “Non-Being and Negative
Reference,” in Reese and Freeman 1964, pp. 311-323.


––– 1991, “The ’Trouble’ with
Panentheism and the Divine Event,” in Hahn (ed.) 1991, pp.
187–202.


Reese, William and Eugene Freeman (eds.), 1964, 
Process and
Divinity: The Hartshorne Festschrift
, LaSalle, IL: Open
Court.


Rescher, Nicholas, 2003, “The Promise of Process
Philosophy,” in Shields (ed.) 2003, pp. 49–66.


Ross, James, 1977, “An Impasse on Competing Descriptions of
God,” 
International Journal for Philosophy of Religion
,
8: 233–249.


Shields, George (ed.), 2003, 
Process and Analysis: Essays on
Whitehead, Hartshorne, and the Analytic Tradition
, Albany: State
University of New York Press.


––– 2003a, “Introduction,” in
Shields (ed.) 2003, pp. 3–47.


–––, 2009, “Quo Vadis?: On Current
Prospects for Process Philosophy and Theology,” 
American
Journal of Theology & Philosophy
, 30: 125–152.


Shields, George and Donald Viney, 2003, “The Logic of Future
Contingents,” in Shields (ed.) 2003, pp. 209–246.


–––, 2019, 
The Mind of Charles
Hartshorne
, Anoka, MN: Process Century Press.


Sia, Santiago (ed.), 1990, 
Charles Hartshorne’s Concept
of God
, Boston: Kluwer.


Skutch, Alexander, 1991, “Bird Song and Philosophy,”
in Hahn (ed.) 1991, pp. 65–76.


Smith, Huston, 1964, “The Death and Rebirth of
Metaphysics,” in Reese and Freeman (eds.) 1964, pp.
37–47.


Smith, John, 1964, “The Critique of Abstractions and the
Scope of Reason,” in Reese and Freeman (eds.) 1964, pp.
19–35.


–––, 1984, “Some Aspects of
Hartshorne’s Treatment of Anselm,” in Cobb and Gamwell
(eds.) 1984, pp. 103–109.


–––, 1991, “Neoclassical Metaphysics and
the History of Philosophy,” in Hahn (ed.) 1991, pp.
489–507.


Sprigge, Timothy, 1991, “Hartshorne’s Conception of
the Past,” in Hahn (ed.) 1991, pp. 397–414.


Thompson, Manley, 1984, “Hartshorne and Peirce,” in
Cobb and Gamwell (eds.) 1984, pp. 130–143.


Towne, Edgar, 1997, 
Two Types of New Theism: Knowledge of God
in the Thought of Paul Tillich and Charles Hartshorne
, New York:
Peter Lang.


Tracy, David, 1985, “Analogy, Metaphor, and God-Language:
Charles Hartshorne,” 
Modern Schoolman
, 62:
249–265.


Van der Veken, Jan, 1991, “Ultimate Reality and God: The
Same?,” in Hahn (ed.) 1991, pp. 203–214.


Viney, Donald, 1985, 
Charles Hartshorne and the Existence of
God
, Albany: State University of New York Press.


–––, 1998, “The Varieties of Theism and
the Openness of God: Charles Hartshorne and Free-Will Theism,”

Personalist Forum
, 14: 196–234.


–––, 2013, “Hartshorne’s Dipolar
Theism and the Mystery of God,” 
Models of God and
Alternative Ultimate Realities
, Dordrecht: Springer,
333–342.


Viney, Donald and Daniel Dombrowski, forthcoming, “Divine
Omnipresence in Process Theism,” 
Oxford Handbook of
Omnipresence
, Oxford: Oxford University Press.


Viney, Wayne, 1991, “Charles Hartshorne’s Philosophy
and Psychology of Sensation,” in Hahn (ed.) 1991, pp.
91–112.


Vitali, Theodore, 1977, “The Peircian Influence on
Hartshorne’s Subjectivism,” 
Process Studies
, 7:
238–249.


Weiss, Paul, 1984, “Nature, God, and Man,” in Cobb and
Gamwell (eds.) 1984, pp. 113–121.


Whitney, Barry, 1985, 
Evil and the Process God
, Toronto:
Edwin Mellon Press.


Wiehl, Reiner, 1991, “Hartshorne’s Panpsychism,”
in Hahn (ed) 1991, 445–462.


Wild, John, 1964, “Devotion and Fanaticism,” in Reese
and Freeman (eds.) 1964, pp. 445–469.


Wolf, George, 1984, “The Place of the Brain in an Ocean of
Feelings,” in Cobb and Gamwell (eds.) 1984, pp.
167–184.


Wright, Sewall, 1964, “Biology and the Philosophy of
Science,” in Reese and Freeman (eds.) 1964, pp.
101–125.


Zycinski, J., 2011, “How to Naturalize Theology?”

Process Studies
, 40(1): 131–143.








Academic Tools










How to cite this entry
.








Preview the PDF version of this entry
 at the
 
Friends of the SEP Society
.








Look up topics and thinkers related to this entry

 at the Internet Philosophy Ontology Project (InPhO).








Enhanced bibliography for this entry

at 
PhilPapers
, with links to its database.












Other Internet Resources




The Center for Process Studies
.


Entries on Hartshorne by George Shields and Donald Viney in the

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy
:

  


Charles Hartshorne: Biography and Psychology of Sensation


Charles Hartshorne: Dipolar Theism


Charles Hartshorne: Neoclassical Metaphysics


Charles Hartshorne: Theistic and Anti-Theistic Arguments












Related Entries




Anselm of Canterbury [Anselm of Bec]
 |
 
cosmology: and theology
 |
 
immutability
 |
 
ontological arguments
 |
 
panpsychism
 |
 
Peirce, Charles Sanders
 |
 
process philosophy
 |
 
process theism
 |
 
religion: epistemology of
 |
 
time
 |
 
Whitehead, Alfred North










 






Copyright © 2024
 by



Dan Dombrowski
<
ddombrow
@
seattleu
.
edu
>
    




 









  Open access to the SEP is made possible by a world-wide funding initiative.

  Please Read How You Can Help Support the Growth and Development of the Encyclopedia




 

