











 
 Entry Navigation 






Entry Contents


Bibliography


Academic Tools


Friends PDF Preview 


Author and Citation Info 
 


Back to Top 


























Molecular Biology
First published Sat Feb 19, 2005; substantive revision Tue Feb 20, 2024





The field of molecular biology studies macromolecules and the
macromolecular mechanisms found in living things, such as the
molecular nature of the gene and its mechanisms of gene replication,
mutation, and expression. Given the fundamental importance of a
mechanistic and macromolecular mode of explanation in many biological
disciplines, the widespread reliance on molecular techniques such as
gel electrophoresis, sequencing, and PCR, as well as the involvement
of molecular biology in recent technological breakthroughs such as
CRISPR, mRNA vaccines and optogenetics, the history and concepts of
molecular biology constitute a focal point of contemporary philosophy
of science and biology.








1. History of Molecular Biology




1.1 Origins


1.2 Classical Period


1.3 Going Molecular


1.4 Going Genomic and Post-Genomic


1.5 Recent Experimental and Conceptual Developments




2. Concepts in Molecular Biology




2.1 Mechanism


2.2 Information


2.3 Gene




3. Molecular Biology and General Philosophy of Science




3.1 Reduction


3.2 Explanation


3.3 Extrapolation


3.4 Experimentation




4. Conclusion


Bibliography


Academic Tools


Other Internet Resources


Related Entries










1. History of Molecular Biology



Despite its prominence in the contemporary life sciences, molecular
biology is a relatively young discipline, originating in the 1930s and
1940s, and becoming institutionalized in the 1950s and 1960s. It
should not be surprising, then, that many of the philosophical issues
in molecular biology are closely intertwined with this recent history.
This section covers the development of molecular biology: its origins,
its classical period, its subsequent migration into other biological
domains, the turn to genomics and post-genomics, and some of the more
recent developments. The rich historiography of molecular biology can
only be briefly utilized in this shortened history (see, for example,
Abir-Am 1985, 1987, 1994, 2006; Burian 1993a; Canguillhem 1989; de
Chadarevian 2002, 2003; de Chadarevian and Gaudilliere 1996; de
Chadarevian and Strasser 2002; Deichmann 2002; Fisher 2010; Hausmann
2002; Holmes 2001; Judson 1980, 1996; Kay 1993; Marcum 2002; Morange
1997a, 2020; Olby 1979, 1990, 1994, 2003; Powell et al. 2007;
Rheinberger 1997; Sapp 1992; Sarkar 1996a; Stegenga 2011; Summers
2023
;
 van Holde and Zlatanova 2018; Witkowski 2005; Zallen
1996. Also see autobiographical accounts by biologists, such as
Brenner 2001; Cohen 1984; Crick 1988; Echols 2001; Jacob 1988;
Kornberg 1989; Luria 1984; Watson 1968, 2002, 2007; Wilkins 2003).


1.1 Origins



The field of molecular biology arose from the convergence of work by
geneticists, physicists, and structural chemists on a common problem:
the nature of inheritance. In the early twentieth century, although
the nascent field of genetics was guided by Mendel’s laws of
segregation and independent assortment, the actual mechanisms of gene
reproduction, mutation and expression remained unknown. Thomas Hunt
Morgan and his colleagues utilized the fruit fly, 
Drosophila
melanogaster
, as a model organism to study the relationship
between the gene and the chromosomes in the hereditary process (Morgan
1926; discussed in Darden 1991; Darden and Maull 1977; Kohler 1994;
Roll-Hanson 1978; Wimsatt 1992). A former student of Morgan’s,
Hermann J. Muller, recognized the “gene as a basis of
life”, and so set out to investigate its structure (Muller
1926). Muller discovered the mutagenic effect of x-rays on

Drosophila
, and utilized this phenomenon as a tool to explore
the size and nature of the gene (Carlson 1966, 1971, 1981, 2011; Crow
1992; Muller 1927). But despite the power of mutagenesis, Muller
recognized that, as a geneticist, he was limited in the extent to
which he could explicate the more fundamental properties of genes and
their actions. He concluded a 1936 essay:





The geneticist himself is helpless to analyse these properties
further. Here the physicist, as well as the chemist, must step in. Who
will volunteer to do so? (Muller 1936: 214)





Muller’s request did not go unanswered. The next decade saw
several famous physicists turn their attention to the nature of
inheritance (Keller 1990; Kendrew 1967). In 
What is Life
, the
physicist Erwin Schroedinger (1944) proposed ways in which the
principles of quantum physics might account for the stability, yet
mutability, of the gene (see the entry on
 
life
; see also Elitzur 1995; Moore 1989; 
 Olby 1994; Sarkar 1991; for a
reinterpretation see Kay 2000). Max Delbrueck also became interested
in the physical basis of heredity after hearing a lecture by his
teacher, quantum physicist Niels Bohr (1933), which expounded a
principle of complementarity between physics and biology (McKaughan
2005; Roll-Hansen 2000). In contrast to Schroedinger, Bohr (and
subsequently Delbrueck) did not seek to reduce biology to physics;
instead, the goal was to understand how each discipline complemented
the other (Delbrueck 1949; Sloan and Fogel 2011). To investigate the
self-reproductive characteristics of life, Delbrueck used
bacteriophage, viruses that infect bacteria and then multiply very
rapidly. The establishment of “The Phage Group” in the
early 1940s by Delbrueck and another physicist-turned-biologist
Salvador Luria marked a critical point in the rise of molecular
biology (Brock 1990; Cairns et al. 1966; Fischer and Lipson 1988;
Fleming 1968; Lewontin 1968; Luria 1984; Morange 2020: Ch. 4; Stent
1968). Delbrueck’s colleague at Cal Tech, Linus Pauling,
utilized his knowledge of structural chemistry to study macromolecular
structure. Pauling contributed both theoretical work on the nature of
chemical bonds and experimental work using x-ray crystallography to
discover the physical structure of macromolecular compounds (Pauling
1939, 1970; Olby 1979; Hager 1995; Crick 1996; Sarkar 1998).



As suggested in the brief history above, experimentation figured
prominently in the rise of molecular biology (see the entry on
 
experiment in biology
).
 X-ray crystallography allowed molecular biologists to investigate the
structure of macromolecules. Alfred Hershey and Martha Chase (1952)
used phage viruses to confirm that the genetic material transmitted
from generation to generation was DNA and not proteins (see
Hershey-Chase Experiment in
 
Other Internet Resources
).
 Muller (1927) used x-rays to intervene on and alter gene function,
thus revealing the application of methods from physics to a biological
domain (see Elof Carlson on Muller’s Research in
 
Other Internet Resources
).



Recognizing quite early the importance of these new physical and
structural chemical approaches to biology, Warren Weaver, then the
director of the Natural Sciences section of the Rockefeller
Foundation, introduced the term “molecular biology” in a
1938 report to the Foundation. Weaver wrote,





And gradually there is coming into being a new branch of
science—molecular biology—which is beginning to uncover
many secrets concerning the ultimate units of the living
cell….in which delicate modern techniques are being used to
investigate ever more minute details of certain life processes (quoted
in Olby 1994: 442).





But perhaps a more telling account of the term’s origin came
from Francis Crick, who said he started calling himself a molecular
biologist because:





when inquiring clergymen asked me what I did, I got tired of
explaining that I was a mixture of crystallographer, biophysicist,
biochemist, and geneticist, an explanation which in any case they
found too hard to grasp. (quoted in Stent 1969: 36)





This brief recapitulation of the origins of molecular biology reflects
themes addressed by philosophers, such as reduction (see
 
Section 3.1
),
 the concept of the gene (see
 
Section 2.3
),
 and experimentation (see
 
Section 3.4
).
 For Schroedinger, biology was to be reduced to the more fundamental
principles of physics, while Delbrueck instead resisted such a
reduction and sought what made biology unique. Muller’s shift
from Mendelian genetics to the study of gene structure raises the
question of the relation between the gene concepts found in those
separate fields of genetics. And the import of experimental methods
from physics to biology raised the question of the relation between
those disciplines.


1.2 Classical Period



Molecular biology’s classical period began in 1953, with James
Watson and Francis Crick’s discovery of the double helical
structure of DNA (Watson and Crick 1953a,b). Watson and Crick’s
scientific relationship unified the various disciplinary approaches
discussed above: Watson, a student of Luria and the phage group,
recognized the need to utilize crystallography to elucidate the
structure of DNA; Crick, a physicist enticed by Schroedinger’s

What is Life?
 to turn to biology, became trained in, and
contributed to the theory of x-ray crystallography. At Cambridge
University, Watson and Crick found that they shared an interest in
genes and the structure of DNA.



Watson and Crick collaborated to build a model of the double helical
structure of DNA, with its two helical strands held together by
hydrogen-bonded base pairs (Olby 1994). They made extensive use of
data from x-ray crystallography work on DNA by Maurice Wilkins and
Rosalind Franklin at King’s College, London, appallingly without
Franklin’s permission or even knowledge (Maddox 2002),
Crick’s theoretical work on crystallography (Crick 1988), and
the model building techniques pioneered by Pauling (de Chadarevian
2002; Judson 1996; Olby 1970, 1994, 2009).



With the structure of DNA in hand, molecular biology shifted its focus
to how the double helical structure aided elucidation of the
mechanisms of genetic replication and function, the keys to
understanding the role of genes in heredity (see the entries on
 
replication and reproduction

 and
 
inheritance systems
).
 This subsequent research was guided by the notion that the gene was
an 
informational
 molecule. According to Lily Kay,





Up until around 1950 molecular biologists…described genetic
mechanisms without ever using the term 
information
. (Kay
2000: 328)





“Information” replaced earlier talk of biological
“specificity”. Watson and Crick’s second paper of
1953, which discussed the genetical implications of their recently
discovered (Watson and Crick 1953a) double-helical structure of DNA,
used both “code” and “information”:





…it therefore seems likely that the precise sequence of the
bases is the 
code
 which carries the genetical

information
…. (Watson and Crick 1953b: 244, emphasis
added)





In 1958, Francis Crick used and characterized the concept of

information
 in the context of stating the “central
dogma” of molecular biology. Crick characterized the central
dogma as follows:





This states that once “information” has passed into
protein 
it cannot get out again
. In more detail, the transfer
of information from nucleic acid to nucleic acid, or from nucleic acid
to protein may be possible, but transfer from protein to protein, or
from protein to nucleic acid is impossible. Information here means the
precise determination of sequence, either of bases in the nucleic acid
or of amino acid residues in the protein. (Crick 1958: 152–153,
emphasis in original)





It is important not to confuse the genetic code and genetic
information. The genetic code refers to the relation between three
bases of DNA, called a “codon”, and one amino acid. Tables
available in molecular biology textbooks (e.g., Watson et al. 1988:
frontispiece) show the relation between 64 codons and 20 amino acids.
For example, CAC codes for histidine. Only a few exceptions for these
coding relations have been found, in a few anomalous cases (see the
list in a small table in Alberts et al. 2002: 814). In contrast,
genetic information refers to the linear sequence of codons along the
DNA, which (in the simplest case) are transcribed to messenger RNA,
which are translated to linearly order the amino acids in a
protein.



With the genetic code elucidated and the relationship between genes
and their molecular products traced, it seemed in the late 1960s that
the concept of the gene was secure in its connection between gene
structure and gene function. The machinery of protein synthesis
translated the coded information in the linear order of nucleic acid
bases into the linear order of amino acids in a protein. However, such
“colinear” simplicity did not persist. In the late 1970s,
a series of discoveries by molecular biologists complicated the
straightforward relationship between a single, continuous DNA sequence
and its protein product. Overlapping genes were discovered (Barrell et
al. 1976); such genes were considered “overlapping”
because two different amino acid chains might be read from the same
stretch of nucleic acids by starting from different points on the DNA
sequence. And split genes were found (Berget et al. 1977; Chow et al.
1977). In contrast to the colinearity hypothesis that a continuous
nucleic acid sequence generated an amino acid chain, it became
apparent that stretches of DNA were often split between coding regions
(exons) and non-coding regions (introns). Moreover, the exons might be
separated by vast portions of this non-coding, supposedly “junk
DNA”. The distinction between exons and introns became even more
complicated when alternative splicing was discovered the following
year (Berk and Sharp 1978). A series of exons could be spliced
together in a variety of ways, thus generating a variety of molecular
products. Discoveries such as overlapping genes, split genes, and
alternative splicing forced molecular biologists to rethink their
understanding of what actually made a gene…a gene (Portin 1993;
for a survey of such complications see Gerstein et al. 2007: Table
1).



In parallel with the elucidation of the mechanisms of replication,
transcription and translation, DNA cloning techniques allowing
researchers to isolate and amplify specific genes from the rest of the
cell’s genome were developed. In the 1960s, the study of the
molecular mechanisms through which bacteria restricted the growth of
bacteriophages led to the discovery of restriction endonucleases
(enzymes that cleave DNA at specific sequences) by Werner Arber,
Daniel Nathans and Hamilton O. Smith. The subsequent discovery of DNA
ligase made it possible to insert fragments generated by restriction
enzymes into vectors, such as bacteriophages or plasmids, and produce
large quantities of recombinant DNA molecules in bacterial cultures.
In turn, the sequencing of recombinant DNA provided the first clues
about possible protein products and their biological function.



With the advent of genetic engineering techniques in the 1970s and
80s, it further became possible to directly test hypotheses about the
biological function of genes and their products. When mutated versions
of genes are introduced into cells and multicellular organisms,
changes in specific biological activities are often observed (Craver
and Darden 2013). Loss-of-function (knockout) mutations demonstrate
that a DNA sequence and the protein or RNA products associated with
that sequence are necessary for biological activity. Gain-of-function
(over-expression) mutations further demonstrate that the genomic
sequence and its products not only contribute to biological activity
but are also rate-limiting. Evidence for biological relevance from
genetic engineering experiments played an important role in
establishing a molecular biology of the cell distinct from both
genetics and biochemistry. Classical genetics could only show that
specific genetic loci are associated with specific phenotypes, while
molecular genetics further elucidated the molecular basis of the gene
and the general mechanisms through which the genetic material is
expressed as biochemically active products. Biochemical analysis of
genes and gene products revealed that DNA, RNA and proteins display
specific patterns of chemical activity, such as affinity for other
molecules, without necessarily showing that chemical activity, as
demonstrated in a test tube, has a biological function. The molecular
biology of the cell combined genetics and biochemistry, providing
evidence that DNA sequences and molecular interactions make a
difference to biological activity in the context of the living
organism (Bechtel 2006; Matlin 2022).



These developments in molecular biology have received philosophical
scrutiny. Molecular biologists sought to discover 
mechanisms

(see
 
Section 2.1
),
 drawing the attention of philosophers to this concept. Also,
conceptualizing DNA as an 
informational
 molecule (see
 
Section 2.2
)
 was a move that philosophers have subjected to critical scrutiny.
Finally, the concept of the 
gene
 (see
 
Section 2.3
)
 itself has intrigued philosophers. Complex molecular mechanisms, such
as alternative splicing, have obligated philosophers to consider to
what the term “gene” actually refers. Experimentation also
figured prominently in the classical period (see
 
Section 3.4
);
 Matthew Meselson and Frank Stahl utilized bacteria grown with
different weights combined with centrifugation to determine how DNA,
as modeled by Watson and Crick, was replicated (Meselson and Stahl
1958; see also The Semi-Conservative Replication of DNA in
 
Other Internet Resources
).


1.3 Going Molecular



In a 1963 letter to Max Perutz, molecular biologist Sydney Brenner
foreshadowed what would be molecular biology’s next intellectual
migration:





It is now widely realized that nearly all the “classical”
problems of molecular biology have either been solved or will be
solved in the next decade…. Because of this, I have long felt
that the future of molecular biology lies in the extension of research
to other fields of biology, notably development and the nervous
system. (Brenner, letter to Perutz, 1963)





Along with Brenner, in the late 1960s and early 1970s, many of the
leading molecular biologists from the classical period redirected
their research agendas, utilizing the newly developed molecular
techniques to investigate unsolved problems in other fields. Francois
Jacob, Jacques Monod and their colleagues used the bacteria

Escherichia coli
 to investigate how environmental conditions
impact gene expression and regulation (Jacob and Monod 1961; discussed
in Craver and Darden 2013; Morange 1998: Ch. 14; Schaffner 1974a;
Weber 2005; see also the entries on
 
developmental biology

 and theories of biological development [link here to entries
“developmental biology” and “theories of biological
development”). The study of behavior and the nervous system also
lured some molecular biologists. Finding appropriate model organisms
that could be subjected to molecular genetic analyses proved
challenging. Returning to the fruit flies used in Mendelian genetics,
Seymour Benzer induced behavioral mutations in 
Drosophila
 as
a “genetic scalpel” to investigate the pathways from genes
to behavior (Benzer 1968; Weiner 1999). And at Cambridge, Sydney
Brenner developed the nematode worm, 
Caenorhabditis elegans
,
to study the nervous system, as well as the genetics of behavior
(Brenner 1973, 2001; Ankeny 2000; Brown 2003). In subsequent decades,
the study of cells was transformed from descriptive cytology into
molecular cell biology (Alberts et al. 1983; Alberts et al. 2002;
Alberts et al. 2022; Bechtel 2006; Matlin 2022; see also the entry on
philosophy of cell biology [link here to entry “philosophy of
cell biology”). The immunological relationship between
antibodies and antigens was recharacterized at the molecular level
(Podolsky and Tauber 1997; Schaffner 1993; see also the entry on the
 
philosophy of immunology
).
 And the study of oncogenes in cancer research as well as the
molecular bases of mental illness were examples of advances in
molecular medicine (Morange 1997b; see also the entry on
 
philosophy of psychiatry
).



While some authors deplored the disconnect between molecular and
evolutionary biology throughout much of the 20
th
 century
(Mayr 1985), the past three decades have been marked by a growing
interdisciplinary collaboration which proved beneficial for both
branches of biology. Molecular genomics supplied new phylogenetic
methods for the comparison of DNA sequences and whole genomes, while
molecular systematics sought to research the evolution of the genetic
code as well as the rates of that evolutionary process by comparing
similarities and differences between molecules (Dietrich 1998; see
also the entries on
 
.evolution
,
 evolution and development [link here to entry “evolution and
development”],
 
heritability
,
 and
 
adaptationism
).
 In turn, comparative phylogenetic studies corroborated a key
assumption guiding research in molecular biology, namely the belief
that, despite an astonishing phenotypic diversity, living things are
similar at a molecular level, such that by studying a handful of model
organisms sampling the main branches of the evolutionary ‘tree
of life’ it is possible to gain generally applicable knowledge.
Evolutionary evidence in favor of the molecular unity of life
assumption has addressed some of the earlier criticisms of
extrapolative practices based on the belief that many species are
fundamentally similar (Logan 2002; Würbel 2002). Evolutionary
biology has also had an important impact on cancer research, prompting
a shift in paradigm from “cancer as a genetic disease,”
which was largely motivated by the discovery of oncogenes and tumor
suppressor genes, to a broader “cancer as a microevolutionary
process” conceptual framework (Okasha 2021; Plutynski 2018;
Pradeu et al. 2023; see also entry on cancer [link here to entry
“cancer”].



This process of “going molecular” thus generally amounted
to using experimental methods from molecular biology to examine
complex phenomena (be it gene regulation, behavior, or evolution) at
the molecular level. The molecularization of many fields introduced a
range of issues of interest to philosophers. The practice of
generalizing findings from model organisms raised questions about the
validation, limits and potential pitfalls of extrapolative inferences
in both basic science and clinical research (see
 
Section 3.3
).
 And the reductive techniques of molecular biology raised questions
about whether scientific investigations should always strive to reduce
to lower and lower levels (see
 
Section 3.1
).


1.4 Going Genomic and Post-Genomic



In the 1970s, as many of the leading molecular biologists were
migrating into other fields, molecular biology itself was going
genomic (see the entry on
 
genomics and postgenomics
).
 The genome is a collection of nucleic acid base pairs within an
organism’s cells (adenine (A) pairs with thymine (T) and
cytosine (C) with guanine (G)). The number of base pairs varies widely
among species. For example, the infection-causing 
Haemophilus
influenzae
 (the first bacterial genome to be sequenced) has
roughly 1.9 million base pairs in its genome (Fleischmann et al.
1995), while the infection-catching 
Homo sapiens
 carries more
than 3 billion base pairs in its genome (International Human Genome
Sequencing Consortium 2001, Venter et al. 2001). The history of
genomics is the history of the development and use of new experimental
and computational methods for producing, storing, and interpreting
such sequence data (Ankeny 2003; Stevens 2013).



Frederick Sanger played a seminal role in initiating such
developments, creating influential DNA sequencing techniques in the
1950s and 1960s (Saiki et al. 1985; for historical treatments see
Sanger 1988; Judson 1992; Culp 1995; Rabinow 1996; Morange 1998; de
Chadarevian 2002; Little 2003; Garcia-Sancho 2012; Sanger Method of
DNA Sequencing in
 
Other Internet Resources
).
 Equally important was Edwin Southern’s development of a method
to detect specific sequences of DNA in DNA samples (Southern 1975).
The Southern Blot, as it came to be known, starts by digesting a
strand of DNA into many small DNA fragments; those fragments are then
separated (in a process called gel electrophoresis) based on size,
placed on filter paper which “blots” the DNA fragments on
to a new medium, and then chemically labeled with DNA probes; the
probes then allow for identification and visualization of the DNA
fragments (see also The Southern Blot in
 
Other Internet Resources
).
 Playing off the “southern” homonym, subsequent blotting
techniques that detect RNA and proteins came to be called Northern
blotting and Western blotting.



In the mid-1980s, after the development of sequencing techniques, the
United States Department of Energy (DoE) originated a project to
sequence the human genome (initially as part of a larger plan to
determine the impact of radiation on the human genome induced by the
Hiroshima and Nagasaki bombings). The resulting Human Genome Project
(HGP) managed jointly by the DoE and the United States National
Institutes of Health (NIH), utilized both existent sequencing
methodologies and introduced new ones (Kevles and Hood 1992, see also
the entry on
 
the human genome project
).
 While the human genome project received most of the public attention,
thousands of genomes have been sequenced to date, including the cat
(Pontius et al. 2007), the mouse (Waterson et al. 2002), rice (Goff et
al. 2002) and a flock of bird genomes (Zhang et al. 2014). The
increased attention to sequencing genomes encouraged several
disciplines to “go genomic”, including behavioral genetics
(Plomin et al. 2003), developmental biology (Srinivasan and Sommer
2002), cell biology (Taniguchi et al. 2002), and evolutionary biology
(Ohta and Kuroiwa 2002). What’s more, genomics was
institutionalized with textbooks (Cantor and Smith 1999) and journals,
such as 
Genome Biology
 and 
Genome Research
. And the
human genome project itself turned its attention from a standardized
human genome to variation between genomes in the form of the Human
Genome Diversity Initiative (Gannett 2003), the HapMap Project
(International HapMap Consortium 2003), and the 1000 Genomes Project
(Siva 2008).



One of the most surprising results of genome sequencing projects was
the total number of genes (defined in this context as stretches of DNA
that code for a protein product) found in the organisms. The human
genome contains 20,000 to 25,000 genes, the cat contains 20,285 genes,
the mouse 24,174, and rice 32,000 to 50,000. In contrast to early
assumptions, it turned out that neither organismal complexity nor even
position on the food chain was predictive of gene-number (Baedke 2018;
Brigandt, Green, and O’Malley 2017; Green 2017) (see the entry
on
 
genomics and postgenomics
).
 A related challenge was making sense of the genetic similarity
claims. For example, how to interpret the finding that human and
pumpkin genomes are 75% similar? Does this finding tell us anything
substantive about our overall similarity to pumpkins (Piotrowska
2009)? These challenges led many researchers to focus more closely on
non-coding regulatory sequences and genome expression regulation as an
alternative explanation of organismal complexity (Morange 2006). This
“post-genomic” approach utilizes the sequence information
provided by genomics but then situates it in an analysis of all the
other entities and activities involved in the mechanisms of
transcription (transcriptomics), regulation (regulomics), metabolism
(metabolomics), and expression (proteomics). (See ENCODE Project
Consortium 2012; Germain et al. 2014; (see also the entry on
 
philosophy of systems and synthetic biology
).



In addition to DNA-binding proteins, RNA molecules that are not
transcribed into protein products play an important role in both the
regulation of protein-coding genes and in protecting the genome from
viruses and transposons. RNA interference (RNAi) are short
single-stranded RNAs that selectively bind other RNA molecules,
inhibiting their translation into proteins. Similar small noncoding
RNAs are part of a defense mechanism, known as CRISPR, which protects
bacteria against invading viruses. Non-coding RNA has become an
extremely powerful experimental tool that allows researchers to
specifically and reversibly inactivate any gene of interest. In
particular, CRISPR systems have been adapted for use in eukaryotic
cells, where they have become the method of choice for genome
manipulation (Doudna and Charpentier 2014). On a conceptual level, the
fact that developmental complexity correlates with an increase in
non-coding sequences, as opposed to protein-coding sequences, led some
authors to conclude that “the original conception of genetic
information was deficient and that most genes in complex organisms
specify regulatory RNAs” (Mattick 2023).



Advances in genomics were largely dependent on the development of new
techniques, some of which capitalized on discoveries generated within
molecular biology, while others imported knowledge from other
disciplines. The discovery of viral reverse transcriptases converting
RNA into DNA by Howard M. Temin, Renato Dulbecco and David Baltimore
in the 1970s paved the way to the development of complementary DNA, or
cDNA, libraries containing only DNA sequences that are transcribed
into mRNA. Not only did this technique revolutionize the study of
genomes, but it also provided a first insight into what was later to
become RNomics, or the study of global transcription profiles of
cells. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR), developed by Kary B. Mullis in
1983, made use of heat-stable DNA polymerases from thermophilic
bacteria to clone DNA in vitro, greatly simplifying and accelerating
the cloning process. Reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction
(RT-PCR) combines the two techniques and is currently used to monitor
gene expression, cloning, diagnosis, and forensics. Second generation
sequencing technologies combining fluorescent tagging with traditional
dideoxy sequencing were likewise instrumental in the proliferation of
genome projects. These new techniques reduced cost and time
significantly, propelling molecular biology into the realm of
“big data” (Leonelli 2016). Finally, with an increase in
the number of sequenced genomes came an increased need and interest in
bioinformatics and the development of genome annotation techniques
(Griffiths and Stotz 2013).



Developments in genomics and post-genomics have sparked a number of
philosophical questions about molecular biology. Since the genome
requires a vast array of other mechanisms to facilitate the generation
of a protein product, can DNA really be causally prioritized (see
 
Section 2.3
)?
 Similarly, in the face of such interdependent mechanisms involved in
transcription, regulation, and expression, can DNA alone be privileged
as the bearer of hereditary information, or is information distributed
across all such entities and activities (see
 
Section 2.2
)?
 And is it appropriate to extrapolate from information about other
species’ genomes to how the human genome operates (see
 
Section 3.3
)?


1.5 Recent Experimental and Conceptual Developments



In addition to the experimental and computational techniques that made
possible large scale “omics” projects, many other
innovations shaped recent research in molecular biology. Unlike x-ray
crystallography, which requires crystalline samples, newly developed
nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy (NMR) and cryo-electron
microscopy (cryo-EM) techniques allow researchers to elucidate the
three-dimensional structure of molecules in solution. The plurality of
methods used to investigate the structure of biomolecules, along with
the occasional disagreements between results yielded by different
methods, provided an interesting case study for exploring the question
pluralism vs. monism in science (Mitchell and Gronenborn 2017;
Mitchell 2009; Bolinska 2022; Vallejos-Baccelliere and Vecchi 2024;
see also entry on pluralism [link here to entry
“pluralism”). These new techniques also revealed that many
proteins contain relatively large unstructured or low-complexity
domains. The fact that many such domains are evolutionarily conserved
suggests that they have biologically relevant functions, such as
providing flexible scaffolds for binding and concentrating
biomolecules in specific areas of the cell. Some scaffolding
structures can form membraneless organelles, or biomolecular
condensates, which, unlike macromolecular machines with a fixed
stoichiometry and geometry (Alberts 1998), behave more like liquids
with a dynamic and variable composition and geometry (Banani et al.
2017).



Stem cell research was marked by major breakthroughs that received
extensive coverage in the media. In 1958, John Gurdon successfully
cloned a frog using a nuclear transplantation technique. The fact that
nuclei extracted from differentiated cells and transplanted into
enucleated eggs develop into apparently normal organisms led
scientists to conclude that cell differentiation is not irreversible,
as once thought, but differentiated cells can be
“reprogrammed” into totipotent and pluripotent stem cells.
Unlike “genetic programming,” “cell
programming” does not involve the alteration of coding
sequences, but rather the overexpression of transcription factors
responsible for the activation of the embryonic stem critical genes
(Fagan 2013, 2021). 



Although it has long been suspected that cellular behaviors must be
inherently probabilistic due to the stochastic nature of the molecular
mechanisms underpinning them, it was generally assumed that cells
manage to minimize molecular noise in order to reliably generate the
deterministic behaviors typically observed by studying large
populations of cells. This assumption is, however, challenged by an
increasing number of studies demonstrating that even isogenic
populations of cells grown in the same environment can display
phenotypic differences. For example, the expression levels of genes
coding for ion channels in neurons of the same type can vary
drastically between cells and between individuals, resulting in
measurable differences in the values of synaptic and membrane
conductances (Marder and Taylor 2011). This, and other similar
phenomena are relevant to the problem of extrapolation, albeit this
time it concerns inferences about individual or singular behaviors
given knowledge of population-level statistics. For example, while
studies on cell populations support the conclusion that cells respond
in a graded fashion to stimuli, it is possible that, in reality, each
cell adopts a categorical, “on” or “off”
response phenotype.



Finally, while many branches of biology have “gone
molecular,” molecular biology itself embraced mathematical
modelling. Mathematical modelling is a common practice in many
branches of biology, including classical and clinical genetics,
ecology, epidemiology, systems biology, as well as in chemistry and
biochemistry. In contrast, molecular biology traditionally relies on
qualitative descriptions that have inspired various philosophical
characterizations of mechanisms (see Section 2.1). This changed over
the past two decades and the latest edition of the widely used

Molecular Biology of the Cell
 textbook (Alberts et al. 2022,
Ch. 8) has a substantive section dedicated to the mathematical
analysis of biological function meant to complement biochemical and
molecular methods of analysis. The dynamic properties of molecular
mechanisms are often investigated by mathematical modelling approaches
borrowed from chemistry, cybernetics, mechanical engineering and
computer science. Likewise, in vitro reconstitution experiments [for a
discussion of in vitro reconstitution experiments, see (Weber 2005;
Matlin 2022)] are supplemented by in silico experiments used to
generate evidence that, in principle, a proposed mechanism suffices to
produce a phenomenon of interest (Bechtel 2011; Braillard & Malaterre
2015) [although such simulations cannot demonstrate that the proposed
mechanism is actually responsible for the phenomenon (Craver
2006)].



The mathematization and subtle shifts in explanatory approaches in
molecular biology and related fields, the development of new
experimental techniques, as well as the experimental and theoretical
exchanges with other disciplines within and outside biology introduce
new problems of interest for philosophers of science and biology.
These include the questions concerning the nature of mechanisms
(Section 2.1) and the completeness of mechanistic explanations
(Section 3.2), reduction and integration (Section 3.1), extrapolations
to individual biological systems (Section 3.3) and experimentation
(Section 3.4).


2. Concepts in Molecular Biology



The concepts of 
mechanism
, 
information
, and

gene
 all figured quite prominently in the history of
molecular biology. Philosophers, in turn, have focused a great deal of
attention on these concepts to understand how they have been, are, and
should be used.


2.1 Mechanism



Traditionally, philosophers of science took successful scientific
explanations to result from derivation from laws of nature (Hempel and
Oppenheim 1948; see the entries on
 
laws of nature

 and
 
scientific explanation
).
 Philosophers of biology have criticized this traditional analysis as
inapplicable to biology, and especially molecular biology. (For
further discussion, see Beatty 1995; Brandon 1997; Lange 2000;
Mitchell 1997; Smart 1963; Sober 1997; Waters 1998; Weber 2005).



Working in the causal-mechanical tradition pioneered by Wesley Salmon
(1984, 1998), philosophers turned to understanding mechanism
elucidation as the avenue to scientific explanation in biology
(Bechtel and Abrahamsen 2005; Bechtel and Richardson 1993; Craver
2007; Darden 2006a; Glennan 2017; Machamer, Darden, and Craver 2000;
Sarkar 1998; Schaffner 1993; Woodward 2002, 2010). Several
characterizations of what a mechanism is have emerged over the years
(Bechtel and Abrahamsen 2005; Glennan 2002; Machamer, Darden, and
Craver 2000). Stuart Glannan summarizes the essential features of
mechanisms as follows:





A mechanism for a phenomenon consists of entities (or parts) whose
activities and interactions are organized so as to be responsible for
the phenomenon. (Glennan 2017: 17) [for a similar characterization see
(Illari and Williamson 2012: 120)]





As an example, consider the phenomenon of DNA replication. The double
helix of DNA (an entity with an organization) unwinds (an activity)
and new component parts (entities) bond (an activity) to both parts of
the unwound DNA helix. DNA is a nucleic acid composed of several
subparts: a sugar-phosphate backbone and nucleic acid bases. When DNA
unwinds, the bases exhibit weak charges, properties that result from
slight asymmetries in the molecules. These weak charges allow a DNA
base and its complement to engage in the activity of forming hydrogen
(weak polar) chemical bonds; the specificity of this activity is due
to the topological arrangements of the weak polar charges in the
subparts of the base. Ultimately, entities with polar charges enable
the activity of hydrogen bond formation. After the complementary bases
align, then the backbone forms via stronger covalent bonding. The
mechanism proceeds with unwinding and bonding together (activities)
new parts, to produce two helices (newly formed entities) that are
(more or less faithful) copies of the parent helix. (This process of
“semi-conservative replication” and the Meselson-Stahl
experiment that confirmed it are discussed in more detail in
 
Section 3.4
.)



There are several virtues of the causal-mechanical approach to
understanding scientific explanation in molecular biology. For one, it
is truest to molecular biologists’ own language when engaging in
biological explanation. Molecular biologists rarely describe their
practice and achievements as the development of new theories; rather,
they describe their practice and achievements as the elucidation of
molecular mechanisms (Baetu 2019; Craver 2001; Machamer, Darden,
Craver 2000; [link here to entry “mechanisms in science”).
Second, knowledge of a mechanism shows how something works: elucidated
mechanisms provide understanding. Third, the causal-mechanical
approach captures biological explanations of both regularity and
variation. Unlike in physics, where a scientist assumes that an
electron is an electron is an electron, a biologist is often
interested in precisely what makes one individual different from
another, one population different from another, or one species
different from another (Calcott 2009; Tabery 2009, 2014). Finally,
knowledge of mechanisms potentially allows one to intervene to change
what the mechanism produces, to manipulate its parts to construct
experimental tools, or to repair a broken, diseased mechanism. In
short, knowledge of elucidated mechanisms provides understanding,
prediction, and control.


2.2 Information



The language of information appears often in molecular biology. Genes
as linear DNA sequences of bases are said to carry
“information” to produce proteins. During protein
synthesis, the information is “transcribed” from DNA to
messenger RNA and then “translated” from RNA to protein.
With respect to inheritance, it is often said that what is passed from
one generation to the next is the “information” in the
genes, namely the linear ordering of bases along complementary DNA
strands. Historians of biology have tracked the entrenchment of
information-talk in molecular biology (Kay 2000) since its
introduction.



The question for philosophers of biology is whether an analysis of the
concept of information can capture the various ways in which the
concept is used in molecular biology (e.g., Maynard Smith 2000). The
usage of “information” in the mathematical theory of
communication is too impoverished to capture the molecular biological
usage, since the coded sequences in the DNA are more than just a
signal with some number of bits that may or may not be accurately
transmitted (Sarkar 1996b,c; Sterelny and Griffiths 1999; Shannon and
Weaver 1949). Conversely, the usage in cognitive neuroscience, with
its talk of “representations” (e.g., Crick 1988) may be
said to be too rich, since the coded sequences in the DNA are also not
said to have within them a representation of the whole-organism
(Kölv 2020) or even of the structure of the protein (Darden
2006b). No definition of “information” as it is used in
molecular biology has yet received wide support among philosophers of
biology.



Stephen Downes (2006) helpfully distinguishes three positions on the
relation between information and the natural world:




Information is present in DNA and other nucleotide sequences.
Other cellular mechanisms contain no information.


Information is present in DNA, in other nucleotide sequences and
other cellular mechanisms, for example cytoplasmic or extra-cellular
proteins; and in many other media, for example, the embryonic
environment or components of an organism’s wider
environment.


DNA and other nucleotide sequences do not contain information, nor
do any other cellular mechanisms.





These options may be read either ontologically or heuristically. A
heuristic reading of (1), for instance, views the talk of information
in molecular biology as useful in providing a way of talking and in
guiding research. And so the heuristic benefit of the information
concept can be defended without making any commitment to the
ontological status (Sarkar 2000). Indeed, one might argue that a vague
and open-ended use of information is valuable for heuristic purposes,
especially during early discovery phases in the development of a
field.



Philosophers’ discussions of the concept of information in
biology have also focused on its ontological reading. Three different
philosophical accounts of information serve as exemplars of
Downes’ three categories. Ulrich Stegmann (2005) provides an
example of Downes’ first category with his analysis of
template-directed synthesis. (Stegmann does explicitly allow that
components other than nucleotide sequences might contain what he calls
instructional information. However, his only example is a thought
experiment involving enzymes linearly ordered along a membrane;
nothing of the sort is known to exist or even seems very likely to
exist.) Stegmann calls this the sequentialization view.
Stegmann’s instructional account of genetic information requires
that the component carrying the information satisfy the following
conditions: an advance specification of the kind and order of steps
that yield a determinate outcome if the steps are carried out. On his
account, DNA qualifies as an instructional information carrier for
replication, transcription and translation. The sequence of bases
provides the order. The hydrogen bonding between specific bases and
the genetic code provides the specific kinds of steps. And the
mechanisms of replication, transcription, and translation yield
certain outcomes: a copy of the DNA double helix, an mRNA, and a
linear order of amino acids. Also, because DNA carries information for
a specific outcome, an error can occur as the mechanism operates to
produce that outcome; hence Stegmann’s account allows for errors
and error-correcting mechanisms (such as proof-reading mechanisms that
correct DNA mutations). For more on this topic, see the entry on
 
biological information
.



Eva Jablonka (2002) offers an example of Downes’ second
category. She argues that information is ubiquitous. She defines
information as follows: a source becomes an informational input when
an interpreting receiver can react to the form of the source (and
variations in this form) in a functional manner. She claims a broad
applicability of this definition. The definition, she says,
accommodates information stemming from environmental cues as well as
from evolved signals, and calls for a comparison between
information-transmission in different types of inheritance systems
— the genetic, the epigenetic, the behavioral, and the
cultural-symbolic. On this view, genes have no theoretically
privileged informational status (Jablonka 2002: 583).



In line with Downes’ third category, C. Kenneth Waters argues
that information is a useful term in rhetorical contexts, such as
seeking funding for DNA sequencing by claiming that DNA carries
information. However, from an ontological perspective, Waters claims
that explication of DNA’s causal role has no need for the
concept of information. Genes, he argues, should not be viewed as
“immaterial units of information” (Waters 2000: 541). As
discussed in
 
Section 2.3

 below, Waters’ focus is on stretches of DNA whose causal roles
are as actual specific difference makers in genetic mechanisms (Waters
2007). Talk of information is not needed; causal role function talk is
sufficient. (For more on Waters’ view see the entry on
 
molecular genetics
;
 for others who make similar points, see Morange 2020; Sustar 2007;
Weber 2005, 2006.) More generally, Oliver Lean (2020) argues that the
notion of binding specificity characteristic of many molecular
interactions (including those between enzymes and substrates,
transcription factors and DNA binding sites, antibodies and antigens,
DNA and RNA) is intimately linked to “the issue of causal
selection – the practice of singling out one or more causes of
an outcome as being ”the“ cause, or of particular
relevance or importance” and may provide the equivalent of an
ideal intervention.


2.3 Gene



The question of whether classical, Mendelian genetics could be (or
already has been) reduced to molecular biology (to be taken up in
 
Section 3.1

 below) motivated philosophers to consider the connectability of the
term they shared: the gene. Investigations of reduction and scientific
change raised the question of how the concept of the gene evolved,
figuring prominently in C. Kenneth Waters’ (1990, 1994, 2007,
see entry on
 
molecular genetics
),
 Philip Kitcher’s (1982, 1984) and Raphael Falk’s (1986)
work. Over time, however, philosophical discussions of the gene
concept took on a life of their own, as philosophers raised questions
independent of the reduction debate: What is a gene? And is there
anything causally distinct about DNA? (see the entry on the
 
gene
)



Falk (1986) explicitly asked philosophers and historians of biology,
“What is a Gene?” Discoveries such as overlapping genes,
split genes, and alternative splicing (discussed in
 
Section 1.2
)
 made it clear that simply equating a gene with an uninterrupted
stretch of DNA would no longer capture the complicated
molecular-developmental details of mechanisms such as gene expression
(Downes 2004; Luc-Germain, Ratti and Boem 2015). In an effort to
answer Falk’s question, two general trends have emerged in the
philosophical literature: first, distinguish multiple gene concepts to
capture the complex structural and functional features separately, or
second, rethink a unified gene concept to incorporate such complexity.
(For a survey of gene concepts defended by philosophers, see Griffiths
and Stotz 2007, 2013; Rheinberger and Muller-Wille 2018. In contrast,
for an argument as to why philosophers should stop investigating the
question, “What is a gene?” see Boem et al. 2016.)



An example of the first line came from Evelyn Fox Keller’s
distinction between the gene as a structural and functional entity
(Keller 2000). A structural gene concept picks out an ordered sequence
of DNA, usually one that corresponds to a single protein or a single
structural, catalytic, or regulatory RNA molecule. In contrast, a
functional gene concept picks out entities that give rise to
phenotypes, which include other parts of the genome. For example,
stretches of regulatory DNA, which do not code for proteins, dictate
when and where proteins are made. Since they play a causal role in
phenotypic expression, they are included under a functional gene
concept. (Lenny Moss (2001, 2002) offers another example of a
gene-concept divider.)



A second philosophical approach for conceptualizing the gene involved
rethinking a single, unified gene concept that captured the
molecular-developmental complexities. For example, Eva Neumann-Held
(Neumann-Held 1999, 2001; Griffiths and Neumann-Held 1999) claimed
that a “process molecular gene concept” (PMG) embraced
complicated developmental intricacies. On her unified view, the term
“gene” referred to “the recurring process that leads
to the temporally and spatially regulated expression of a particular
polypeptide product” (Neumann-Held 1999). More recently,
Francesca Bellazzi (2022) has argued for an even more flexible and
context dependent gene concept. According to Bellazzi, genes are
weakly emergent entities that are both relational and temporal.
Specifically, genes emerge from precise segments of DNA during the
process of transcription, which occurs when intricate mechanisms
operate within the surrounding context. (Falk (2001) offers another
example of a gene-concept unifier.)



Relatedly, philosophers have also debated the causal distinctiveness
of DNA. Although there is wide agreement that phenotypes are caused by
stretches of DNA and by all the other developmental resources involved
in gene expression, there is disagreement about how to weigh the
importance of the causal contribution of all the factors involved.
Proponents of the “causal parity thesis” argue that all
developmental resources involved in the generation of a phenotype
should be treated as being on par (Griffiths and Knight 1998;
Griffiths and Stotz 2013; Robert 2004; Stotz 2006). In contrast,
proponents of the “causal specificity” of genetic material
argue that the ability to exercise more precise control over its
effects sets genetic material apart from other biological causes
(Griffiths et al. 2015; Waters 2007; Weber 2017). Waters was the first
to offer an influential response to the causal parity thesis, based on
his distinction between “potential” and “actual
difference makers.” According to Waters, DNA is causally
distinctive because it fulfills the conditions of being an actual
difference maker (see the entry on
 
molecular genetics

 [link here to entry “molecular genetics”] for more on
this distinction).



Related to the debate about the causal distinctiveness of DNA has been
the question of how to classify so-called junk DNA. Most biologists
and philosophers of biology do not consider junk-DNA to be on causal
par with coding DNA, because mutations in junk-DNA do not affect
function (although for an alternate account of junk-DNA’s
non-coding function see Doolittle 2013). However, Joyce Havstad and
Alexander Palazzo (2022) have argued that despite its paradigmatically
non-functional role, junk DNA meets the criteria of being an actual
difference maker. But since junk-DNA is not considered to be on causal
par with coding DNA, this suggests that Waters’ account of what
makes coding DNA causally distinctive is incomplete. According to
Havstad and Palazzo, the missing components are ‘causal
reach’ and ‘causal efficacy.’ While junk DNA can
indeed produce causally specific proximate effects, its causal
specificity has limited reach and efficacy, which is why it is not
considered to be on par with coding DNA in terms of causality.
Nonetheless, Havstad and Palazzo maintain that the diminished causal
status of junk-DNA in relation to coding DNA does not diminish its
significance within the cell.


3. Molecular Biology and General Philosophy of Science



In addition to analyzing key concepts in the field, philosophers have
employed case studies from molecular biology to address more general
issues in the philosophy of science, such as reduction, explanation,
extrapolation, and experimentation. For each of these philosophical
issues, evidence from molecular biology directs philosophical
attention toward understanding the concept of a mechanism for
addressing the topic.


3.1 Reduction



Reduction may be understood in multiple ways depending on what it is
that is being reduced (see the entry on
 
scientific reduction
).
 Theory reduction pertains to whether theories from one scientific
field can be reduced to theories from another scientific field. In
contrast, explanatory reduction (often united with methodological
reduction) pertains to whether or not explanations that come from
lower levels (often united with methodologies that investigate those
lower levels) are better than explanations that come from higher
levels. Philosophical attention to molecular biology has contributed
to debates about both of these senses of reduction (see the entry on
 
reductionism in biology
).



Philosophy of biology first came to prominence as a subspecialty of
philosophy of science in the 1970s when it offered an apparent case
study by which to judge how theories from one field may reduce to
theories from another field. The specific question was: might classic,
Mendelian genetics reduce to molecular genetics (see the entry on
 
molecular genetics
)?
 Kenneth Schaffner used and developed Ernst Nagel’s (1961)
analysis of derivational theory reduction to argue for the reduction
of classical Mendelian genetics (
T
2
) to molecular
biology (
T
1
) and refined it over many years
(summarized in Schaffner 1993). The goal of formal reduction was to
logically deduce the laws of classical genetics (or its improved
successor, “modern transmission genetics”

T
2
*) from the laws of molecular biology. Such a
derivation required that all the terms of 
T
2
* not
in 
T
1
 had to be connected to terms in

T
1
 via correspondence rules. Hence, Schaffner
endeavored to find molecular equivalents of such terms as
“gene,” as well as predicate terms, such as “is
dominant.” David Hull (1974) criticized formal reduction, argued
against Schaffner’s claims, and suggested, instead, that perhaps
molecular biology replaced classical genetics. However, the absence of
explicit laws in most fields of biology raised doubts about the
relevance of intertheoretical reduction in biology, prompting a shift
of attention to explanation and methodology. William Wimsatt (1976)
highlighted the importance of decompositional explanation via
mechanisms, while Lindley Darden and Nancy Maull (1977) focused
attention on the bridges between fields formed by part-whole
relations, structure-function relations, and cause-effect
relations.



With the emergence of the new mechanistic philosophy (Glennan and
Illari 2017; Machamer et al. 2000), the question of the relationship
between molecular biology and other biological disciplines has been
analyzed through the lens of mechanisms. The decomposition of
biological systems often reveals a hierarchical organization, which
led some authors to propose that lower-level components are organized
as mechanisms underlying higher-level components (Bechtel 2006;
Bechtel and Richardson 2010; Craver 2007; Craver and Povich, 2017;
Craver et al. 2021). The notion that explanations in biology can occur
at different levels of description fueled a new reductionism debate
concerning whether lower-level molecular explanations (often united
with methodologies that investigate those lower levels) are better or
more complete than higher-level explanations. On the reductionist
side, it has been argued that higher-level explanations involving
biological or functional kinds such as organism, cell, and gene
ultimately need to be completed, and occasionally replaced, by
molecular biology explanations and, in more general terms, by
explanations in terms of chemical and physical entities and
interactions (Bickle 1998, Rosenberg 2020). In response to
reductionistic proposals, critics highlighted the fact that
biologically relevant information is coded not only in the specificity
of molecular interactions, but also in a variety of organizational and
contextual features not captured by molecular biological principles,
such as spatial, regulatory, and dynamical properties of developing
systems (Delehanty 2005; Frost-Arnold 2004; Keller 1999; Laubichler
and Wagner 2001; Love et al. 2008; Robert 2001, 2004).



Eschewing the traditional reductionism-antireductionism dichotomy,
Darden (2005) argued that classical genetics and molecular biology
elucidated sequentially operating chromosomal and molecular
mechanisms, each involving different working entities operating at
different spatiotemporal scales. This suggested that an integrative
account should replace talk of reduction or replacement. Molecular
biology was born by integrating approaches from physics, chemistry and
biology (Section 1.1) and similar interdisciplinary and integrative
tendencies are illustrated by recent exchanges between molecular
biology and evolutionary biology in comparative phylogenetics,
developmental biology, and cancer research (Section 1.5). Integrative
approaches have also been proposed in an attempt to reconcile
mechanistic explanations with other types of explanation that may be
relevant to molecular biology (Section 3.2 below). For example, it has
been argued that, while essential to the understanding of life (as
well as gaining experimental control and developing new treatments and
technologies), molecular explanations are incomplete or insufficient,
and need to be complemented by mathematical models in order to account
for dynamical and quantitative aspects of biological phenomena
(Bechtel and Abrahamsen 2010; Braillard et Malaterre 2015; Brigandt
2013). This particular debate can be understood as an instance of a
more general debate about the relationship between molecular and
systems biology (Bechtel 2020; Bechtel and Abrahamsen 2010; De Backer,
De Waele, and Van Speybroeck 2010; Huettemann and Love 2011; Marco
2012; Morange 2008; Pigliucci 2013; Powell and Dupre 2009; see also
section 3.2 below and the entries on
 
feminist philosophy of biology
,
 
philosophy of systems and synthetic biology
, and
 
multiple realizability
).


3.2 Explanation



In addition to mechanistic approaches (Section 2.1), other accounts of
explanation in molecular biology have been proposed (Braillard and
Malaterre 2015). Philip Kitcher (1989, 1993) developed a
unificationist account of explanation, and he and Sylvia Culp
explicitly applied it to molecular biology (Culp and Kitcher 1989).
Among the premises of the “Watson-Crick” argument schema
were “transcription, post-transcriptional modification and
translation for the alleles in question”, along with details of
cell biology and embryology for the organisms in question (Kitcher
1989). An explanation of a particular pattern of distribution of
progeny phenotypes in a genetic cross resulted from instantiating the
appropriate deductive argument schema: the variables were filled with
the details from the particular case and the conclusion derived from
the premises.



Several authors have raised the possibility that explanations in terms
of pathways are distinct from mechanistic explanations (Boniolo and
Campaner 2018; Brigandt 2018), most notably on the grounds that
“a single pathway can be instantiated by different mechanisms,
that distinct pathways can have similar mechanisms, and that pathways
can be discovered without any knowledge of the mechanisms that
underlie them” (Ross 2018: 132). While Lauren Ross argued for
drawing a sharper distinction between mechanistic and pathway
explanations, Stavros Ioannidis and Stathis Psillos (2017) proposed to
revise the concept of mechanism along the lines of a causal pathway or
structure, arguing for a minimalist mechanistic ontology committed
solely to the existence of causal dependencies between measured or
manipulated variables. The realization that unstructured proteins can
have biologically relevant functions and the discovery of biomolecular
condensates (Section 1.5), contributed to a renewed philosophical
interest in process ontologies. Proponents of processual approaches
(Bapteste and Dupre 2013; Bickhard 2011; Campbell 2015; Dupre 2012;
Jaeger and Monk 2015; Jaeger et al. 2012; Meincke 2018; Nicholson and
Dupre 2018) argue that processes are ontologically primary and that
mechanistic accounts mistakenly assume that parts composing a
biological mechanism can be identified independently of the activities
or processes in which they are involved. However, other authors
challenged the idea that processual explanations can be sufficiently
grounded “
without
 the metaphysical underpinning of the
very mechanisms which processes purport to replace” (Austin
2016: 639).



Finally, the concept of mechanistic explanation itself evolved in
response to recent trends in molecular biology. Traditionally,
mechanistic explanations in molecular biology are construed as
qualitative representations consisting of narratives or diagrams.
These representations, which may be called “models of a
mechanism” (see the entry on
 
models in science
),
 are meant to convey an intuitive understanding by simulating the
working of mechanisms in our imagination (Bechtel and Abrahamsen 2005)
or by analogy with more common types of activities (Machamer 2004).
While qualitative representations play an important role in scientific
practice, they remain heavily idealized (Baetu 2017; Love and Nathan
2015). Quantitative and dynamic aspects are absent or highly
simplified, while known facts are distorted in order to outline a
deterministic sequence of events tracking the fate of single molecules
(a more accurate biochemical description would be that of a series of
back and forth equilibria involving populations of colliding
molecules), each assumed to be rigidly structured (ignoring the fact
that molecules vibrate and cycle through various configurations), as
they modify one another in order to bring about a change from an
initial to a final state (thus masking an underlying variety of
chemical pathways that contribute to the same final state and
alternate pathways where mechanisms fail to contribute to the output).
Mathematical modelling aims to circumvent these shortcomings by
formally describing quantitative, dynamic and stochastic aspects of
molecular mechanisms that are not adequately represented by narratives
and diagrammatic representations. The use of formal methods for
understanding molecular mechanisms attracted the attention of
philosophers, who explored the extent to which mathematical modelling
and computer simulations complement and extend mechanistic
explanations (Bechtel and Abrahamsen 2010; Brigandt 2013; Braillard
and Malaterre 2015) or constitute a significant departure from a
strictly mechanistic mode of explanation (Braillard 2010; Silberstein
and Chemero 2013).



The fact that many biological mechanisms are stochastic contributed to
a general debate about the extent to which regularity is an essential
characteristic of mechanisms (Andersen 2012; Darden 2008), with some
authors emphasizing the highly irregular of some mechanisms (Bogen
2005). In the case of molecular biology, the intrinsically stochastic
nature of molecular mechanisms further led scientists and philosophers
to question the hegemony of the traditional
“order-from-order” paradigm of molecular biology initially
suggested by Schroedinger (1944) and reinforced by the specificity of
molecular interactions [for a discussion of the concept of
specificity, see (Lean 2020)], and introduce an alternative,
“order-from-disorder” explanatory approach (Ilan 2020;
Kupiec et al. 2011). For example, probabilistic biases in the
distribution of adhesion proteins suffice to generate the right amount
of twisting in the developing gut, while stochastic gene expression is
responsible for generating blue- to ultraviolet-sensitive cells ratios
in the 
Drosophila
 eye. Another interesting example is that of
molecular ratchet mechanisms exploiting thermal noise to do mechanical
work (Astumian 2001), which led Bechtel and Bollhagen (2021: 12705) to
argue that the traditional mechanistic ontology of mechanisms
“should be expanded to include constraints and
energetics.”


3.3 Extrapolation



As discussed earlier in the historical sections, molecular biologists
have relied heavily on model organisms (see the entry on
 
models in science
).
 For example, research on 
E. coli
 and yeast provided the
foundation needed to understand genetic mechanisms in various cells,
but the advent of recombinant DNA technology in the 1970s enabled
researchers to modify model organisms to fit their needs. The fruit
fly was often used in the early recombinant DNA experiments. According
to Marcel Weber “The molecular Drosophilists 
genetically
engineered
 their favorite lab animal until it became a highly
productive system for identifying and isolating DNA regions that
interested them” (Weber 2005, 169). The latest CRISPR technology
has made the modification of model organisms even more precise and
affordable. Today, researchers often “humanize” laboratory
mice by inserting human genes or cells into the animal to model some
aspect of human physiology (Piotrowska 2013). However, humanized
animals are not human, which means that researchers must still justify
their beliefs that these mice are similar enough to their human
counterparts to mimic human physiology. Relatedly, when a therapy
tested on humanized mice shows promising results, researchers must
still justify any inference about the likelihood of the therapy being
effective in humans despite causally relevant differences between the
model and the target.



This difficulty, of “transferring causal generalizations from
one context to another when homogeneity cannot be presumed”
(Steel 2008: 3) is known as the 
problem of extrapolation
. A
number of philosophers have explored this problem in the context of
molecular biology (see, for example, Ankeny 2001; Baetu 2016; Bechtel
and Abrahamsen 2005; Bolker 1995, 2009, 2017; Burian 1993b; Darden
2007; LaFollette and Shanks 1996; Love 2009; Nelson 2018; Piotrowska
2013; Schaffner 1986; Steel 2008; Weber 2005; Wimsatt 1998). Solving
the problem of extrapolation has proven difficult because determining
whether the model and its target are similar enough in causally
relevant respects often leads to a trap—what Daniel Steel (2008)
calls the “extrapolator’s circle.” One way to escape
the extrapolator’s circle is to black box the mechanisms being
compared and instead treat the problem of extrapolation as a
statistical problem (cf. Cook and Campbell 1979). This method hinges
on demonstrating statistically significant outcomes from the same
intervention, sidestepping the need to establish mechanism similarity.
One problem with relying merely on statistics to solve the problem of
extrapolation, however, is that it cannot show that an observed
correlation between model and target is the result of intervention and
not a confounder. A more promising formal approach to the problem of
extrapolation exploits the fact that certain probability distributions
and patterns of statistical dependency are insensitive to changes in
causal structure (Hernán and Vanderweele 2011; Pearl and
Bareinboim 2014).



A different strategy for avoiding the extrapolator’s circle is
to remove the black box and compare the two mechanisms but argue that
they do not have to be causally similar at every stage for
extrapolation to be justified. This approach avoids the circle because
the suitability of a model can be established given only partial
information about the target. For example, Steel argues that only the
stages downstream from the point where the mechanisms in the model and
target are likely to differ need to be compared, since the point where
differences are likely will serve as a bottleneck through which the
eventual outcome must be produced. Despite its promise, criticisms
have emerged. Jeremy Howick et al. (2013) express concern that
identifying bottlenecks and downstream differences requires more
target information than Steel acknowledges, potentially reintroducing
the extrapolator’s circle. Another critique, raised by Julian
Reiss (2010), Federica Russo (2010), and Brendan Clarke et al. (2014),
is that Steel’s approach doesn’t address the masking
problem, leaving open the possibility of multiple paths linking X to
Y. For example, there may be an upstream difference that affects the
outcome but does not pass through the downstream stages of the
mechanism. (This problem is taken up again below in
 
Section 3.4
.)
 A third concern, voiced by Baetu (2016), is that mechanistic accounts
often combine data from various experimental setups, creating a
theoretical chimera unsupported by a consistent mechanism present in
any cell or organism. Instead, as several authors have also pointed
out (Huber and Keuck 2013; Lemoine 2017; Nelson 2013, 2018), the
mechanism of interest is often stipulated first and then verified
piecemeal in many different experimental organisms. The result is what
Mael Lemoine (2017) has called a “theoretical chimera”, a
hypothesis supported by heterogeneous partial models. On the chimera
view of extrapolation, it’s possible that all one-to-one
analogies work, and yet the aggregate theoretical chimera model
fails.


3.4 Experimentation



The history of molecular biology is in part the history of
experimental techniques designed to probe the macromolecular
mechanisms found in living things. Philosophers in turn have looked to
molecular biology as a case study for understanding how
experimentation works in science—how it contributes to
scientific discovery, distinguishes correlation from causal and
constitutive relevance, and decides between competing hypotheses
(Marcum 2007; Baetu 2019; Barwich and Baschir 2017; Craver and Darden
2013; Rheinberger 1997; Weber 2009, 2008, 2005; see also Experiment in
Biology [link here to entry “Experiment in Biology”]).



Lindley Darden has focused on the strategies that scientists employ to
construct, evaluate, and revise mechanical explanations of phenomena;
on her view, discovery is a piecemeal, incremental, and iterative
process of mechanism elucidation. In the 1950s and 1960s, for example,
scientists from both molecular biology and biochemistry employed their
own experimental strategies to elucidate the mechanisms of protein
synthesis that linked DNA to the production of proteins. Molecular
biologists moved forward from DNA using experimental techniques such
as x-ray crystallography and model building to understand how the
structure of DNA dictated what molecules it could interact with;
biochemists simultaneously moved backward from the protein products
using 
in vitro
 experimental systems to understand the
chemical reactions and chemical bonding necessary to build a protein.
They met in the middle at RNA, ultimately leading to Watson’s
famous mechanism schema DNA → RNA → protein. Far from being
philosophically inscrutable, Darden points out that the molecular
biologists were “forward chaining” while the biochemists
were “backward chaining”, using information about the
working entities and activities that they knew about to infer what
could come next or before in the mechanism of protein synthesis
(Darden 2006a: chapters 3, 12; Craver and Darden 2013: chapter
10).



Tudor Baetu (2019) has attempted a reconstruction of the discovery
process in molecular biology using the mechanisms of inflammatory
responses as a case study. Following Bechtel and Richardson (1993), he
argues research in molecular biology typically involves the
development of standardized experimental models in the context of
which phenomena can be systematically replicated. For example, an
experimental model of inflammation specifies a replicable and
recognizable physical object of investigation, namely the experimental
setup likely to contain within its spatiotemporal boundaries all the
causal ingredients required for producing an inflammatory response of
the skin. Putative mechanistic components are identified by
systematically targeting variables describing the experimental setup
in the hope of demonstrating that specific changes in the experimental
setup and the physical systems of which it is composed result in
changes in the phenomenon under investigation (Craver and Darden
2013). However, in contrast to “levelled” mutual
manipulability accounts proposed in the mechanistic literature
(Craver, Glennan, and Povich 2021; Craver 2007; entry on
 
mechanisms in science
),
 Baetu argues that experiments in molecular biology can only generate
evidence for causal mediation, which only allows for the
reconstruction of “flat” mechanisms in which levels of
decomposition are replaced by levels of graininess of causal
descriptions [For similar views see (Fazekas 2022; Harinen 2014).]
Finally, a mechanism must be “recomposed” to show how it
generates the phenomenon (Bechtel 2011). In practice, a
mechanism’s recomposition often relies on in vitro
reconstitution experiments (Weber 2005; Matlin 2022) or mathematical
models (Braillard and Malaterre 2015) aiming to demonstrate that
components organized, acting, and having the properties described in
the mechanistic explanation can, and ideally are sufficient to produce
the phenomenon under investigation. A physical interpretation of the
variables measured and manipulated in experiments, based on a
theoretical commitment of molecular biology to the ontology of
chemistry or an understanding of how experimental techniques work
(Weber 2009), is also an important ingredient in the recomposition of
mechanisms.



Experiments from molecular biology have also figured into
philosophical discussions about the possibility of “crucial
experiments”. An experiment is taken to be a crucial experiment
if it is devised so as to result in the confirmation of one hypothesis
by way of refuting other competing hypotheses. But the very idea of a
crucial experiment, Pierre Duhem pointed out, assumes that the set of
known competing hypotheses contains all possible explanations of a
given phenomenon such that the refutation of all but one of the
hypotheses deductively ensures the confirmation of the hypothesis left
standing. However, if there are in fact unknown alternatives that
weren’t considered in the set of competing hypotheses, Duhem
warned, then the refutation cannot guarantee the confirmation of the
last hypothesis standing (also see the entry on Pierre Duhem [link
here to entry “Pierre Duhem”). (Duhem raised two problems
for crucial experiments—the problem mentioned above, as well as
the problem of auxiliary assumptions, which any hypothesis brings with
it; for reasons of space, we will only discuss the former here.)
Marcel Weber has analyzed two famous discovery episodes in molecular
biology, Peter Mitchell’s elucidation of the mechanism for
oxidative phosphorylation (Weber 2009) and the Meselson-Stahl
experiment corroborating the semiconservative DNA replication
mechanism proposed by Watson and Crick (Weber 2005: Chapter 4) to
offer a different vision of how crucial experiments work. He concludes
that, in both cases, experiments generated strong evidence favoring
one mechanistic hypothesis while ruling out the most important rival
explanations proposed at the time, thus approximating the ideal of a
crucial experiment. However, Weber argues that we should understand
the quick uptake of Meselson and Stahl’s experimental result
(Meselson and Stahl 1958; Holmes 2001) as an instance of inference to
the best explanation (as opposed to Duhem’s deductive
characterization). Meselson and Stahl, Weber claims, took the
physiological mechanism of DNA replication and then embedded it in an
“experimental mechanism”; that experimental mechanism then
generated the observed data pattern of heavy-vs-light DNA. Moreover,
any hypothesis of DNA replication had to satisfy mechanistic
constraints imposed by what was already known about the physiological
mechanism—that DNA was a double helix, and that the sequence of
nucleotides in the DNA needed to be preserved in subsequent
generations. So Duhem’s concern about unknown alternatives was
alleviated because known mechanistic constraints limited the set of
possible hypotheses that could generate the phenomenon. On
Weber’s reading, the mechanistic constraints culled the set of
possible hypotheses for DNA replication to semi-conservative
replication, conservative replication, and dispersive replication;
then, among that set, Meselson and Stahl devised an experimental
mechanism such that semi-conservative replication was the best
explanation of the data pattern they found.


4. Conclusion



An overview of the history of molecular biology revealed the original
convergence of geneticists, physicists, and structural chemists on a
common problem: the nature of inheritance. Conceptual and
methodological frameworks from each of these disciplinary strands
united in the ultimate determination of the double helical structure
of DNA (conceived of as an informational molecule) along with the
mechanisms of gene replication, mutation, and expression. With this
recent history in mind, philosophers of molecular biology have
examined the key concepts of the field: mechanism, information, and
gene. Moreover, molecular biology has provided cases for addressing
more general issues in the philosophy of science, such as reduction,
explanation, extrapolation, and experimentation.






Bibliography




Abir-Am, Pnina, 1985, “Themes, Genres and Orders of
Legitimation in the Consolidation of New Scientific Disciplines:
Deconstructing the Historiography of Molecular Biology”,

History of Science
, 23: 74–117.


–––, 1987, “The Biotheoretical Gathering,
Trans-Disciplinary Authority and the Incipient Legitimation of
Molecular Biology in the 1930s: New Perspective on the Historical
Sociology of Science”, 
History of Science
, 25:
1–70.


–––, 1994, “Converging Failure: Science
Policy, Historiography and Social Theory of Early Molecular
Biology”, in Tamara Horowitz and Allen I. Janis (eds.),

Scientific Failure
, New York: Roman and Littlefield
Publishers, Inc., 141–166.


–––, 2006, “Molecular Biology and Its
Recent Historiography: A Transnational Quest for the ‘Big
Picture’”, 
History of Science
, 44:
95–118.


Alberts, Bruce, Dennis Bray, Julian Lewis, Martin Raff, Keith
Roberts and James D. Watson, 1983, 
Molecular Biology of the
Cell
, New York: Garland.


Alberts, Bruce, Alexander Johnson, Julian Lewis, Martin Raff,
Keith Roberts, and Peter Walter, 2002, 
Molecular Biology of the
Cell
, fourth edition, New York: Garland.


Alberts, Bruce, Rebecca Heald, Alexander Johnson, David Morgan,
Martin Raff, Keith Roberts, and Peter Walter, 2022. 
Molecular
Biology of the Cell
, seventh edition, New York: Norton.


Andersen, Holly, 2012, “The Case for Regularity in
Mechanistic Causal Explanation”, 
Synthese
, 189:
415–32.


Ankeny, Rachel A., 2000, “Fashioning Descriptive Models in
Biology: Of Worms and Wiring Diagrams”, 
Philosophy of
Science
 (Proceedings of the 1998 Biennial Meetings of the
Philosophy of Science Association), 67(supplement):
S260–S272.


–––, 2001, “Model Organisms as Models:
Understanding the ‘Lingua Franca’ of the Human Genome
Project”, 
Philosophy of Science
 (Proceedings of the
2000 Biennial Meeting of the Philosophy of Science Association), 68(3,
supplement): S251–S261.


–––, 2003, “Sequencing the Genome from
Nematode to Human: Changing Methods, Changing Science”,

Endeavour
, 27: 87–92.


Astumian, Dean, 2001, “Making Molecules into Motors”,

Scientific American
, 285(1): 56–64.


Austin, Christopher J., 2016, “The ontology of organisms:
Mechanistic mdules or patterned processes?”, 
Biology and
Philosophy
, 31: 639–662.


Baedke, Jan, 2018, 
Above the Gene, Beyond Biology: Toward a
Philosophy of Epigenetics
. Pittsburgh, PH: University of
Pittsburgh Press.


Baetu, Tudor M., 2016, “The ‘Big Picture’: The
Problem of Extrapolation in Basic Research”, 
The British
Journal for the Philosophy of Science
, 67: 941–964.


–––, 2017, “Mechanisms in Molecular
Biology”, in Glennan and Illari (eds.), 
The Routledge
Handbook of Mechanisms and Mechanistic Philosophy
, London, UK:
Routledge, 308–318.


–––, 2019, 
Mechanisms in Molecular
Biology
, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.


Banani, Salman F., Hyun O. Lee, Anthony A. Hyman, and Michael K.
Rosen, 2017, “Biomolecular Condensates: Organizers of Cellular
Biochemistry”, 
Nature Reviews Molecular Cell Biology
,
18: 285–98.


Bapteste, Eric and John Dupre, 2013, “Towards a processual
microbial ontology”, 
Biology and Philosophy
, 28:
379–404.


Barrell, B.G., Gillian M. Air, and Clyde A. Hutchison III, 1976,
“Overlapping Genes in Bacteriophage PhiX174”,

Nature
, 264: 34–41.


Barwich, Ann-Sophie and Karim Baschir, 2017, “The
Manipulability of What? The History of G–Protein Coupled
Receptors”, 
Biology and Philosophy
 32:
1317–1339


Beatty, John, 1995, “The Evolutionary Contingency
Thesis”, in Lennox and Wolters 1995: 45–81.


Bechtel, William, 2006, 
Discovering Cell Mechanisms: The
Creation of Modern Cell Biology
, New York: Cambridge University
Press.


–––, 2011, “Mechanism and Biological
Explanation”, 
Philosophy of Science
, 78:
533–557.


–––, 2020, “Hierarchy and Levels:
Analysing Networks to Study Mechanisms in Molecular Biology”,

Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological
Sciences
, 375(1796): 20190320.


Bechtel, William and Robert C. Richardson, 1993, 
Discovering
Complexity: Decomposition and Localization as Strategies in Scientific
Research
, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. (2nd
edition, 2010, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.)


Bechtel, William and Adele Abrahamsen, 2005, “Explanation: A
Mechanistic Alternative”, 
Studies in the History and
Philosophy of Biology and the Biomedical Sciences
, 36:
421–441.


–––, 2010, “Dynamic Mechanistic
Explanation: Computational Modeling of Circadian Rhythms as an
Exemplar for Cognitive Science”, 
Studies in History and
Philosophy of Science Part A
, 41: 321–333.


–––, 2013, “Thinking Dynamically about
Biological Mechanisms: Networks of Coupled Oscillators”,

Foundations of Science
, 18: 707–723.


Bechtel, William and Andrew Bollhagen, 2021, “Active
Biological Mechanisms: Transforming Energy into Motion in Molecular
Motors”, 
Synthese
, 199(5–6): 12705–12729.


Bellazzi, Francesca, 2022, “The emergence of the postgenomic
gene”, 
European Journal for Philosophy of Science
,
12(1): 1–21.


Benzer, Seymour, 1968, “Genes and Behavior”,

Engineering and Science
, 32: 50–52.


Berget, Susan, Claire Moore, and Philip Sharp, 1977,
“Spliced Segments at the 5’ Terminus of Adenovirus 2 Late
mRNA”, 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences

(USA), 74: 3171–3175.


Berk, Arnold and Philip Sharp, 1978, “Structure of the
Adenovirus 2 Early mRNAs”, 
Cell
, 14:
695–711.


Bickhard, Mark H., 2011, “Systems and Process
Metaphysics”, in Cliff Hooker (ed.), 
Handbook of Philosophy
of Science. Philosophy of Complex Systems, Vol. 10
, Amsterdam:
Elsevier, 91–104.


Bickle, John W., 1998, 
Psychoneural Reduction: The New
Wave
, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.


Boem, Federico, Emanuele Ratti, Mattia Andreoletti, and Giovanni
Boniolo, 2016, “Why genes are like lemons”, 
Studies in
History and Philosophy of Science Part C: Studies in History and
Philosophy of Biological and Biomedical Sciences
, 57:
88–95.


Bogen, James, 2005, “Regularities and Causality;
Generalizations and Causal Explanations”, 
Studies in History
and Philosophy of Biological and Biomedical Sciences
, 36:
397–420.


Bohr, Niels, 1933, “Light and Life”, 
Nature
,
131: 421–423.


Bolinska, Agnes, 2022, “A Monist Proposal: Against
Integrative Pluralism About Protein Structure”,

Erkenntnis
, first online 11 August
2022. doi:10.1007/s10670-022-00601-2


Bolker, Jessica A., 1995, “Model Systems in Developmental
Biology”, 
BioEssays
, 17: 451–455.


–––, 2009, “Exemplary and Surrogate
Models: Two Modes of Representation in Biology”,

Perspectives in Biology and Medicine
, 52(4):
485–499.


–––, 2017, “Animal models in translational
research: Rosetta stone or stumbling block?” 
Bioessays
,
39(12): 1700089.


Boniolo, Giovanni and Raffaella Campaner, 2018, “Molecular
pathways and the contextual explanation of molecular functions”,

Biology and Philosophy
, 33: 24.


Boogerd, Fred C., Frank J. Bruggeman, Jan-Hendrik S Hofmeyr. and
Hans V. Westerhoff 2007), “Afterthoughts as Foundations for
Systems Biology”, in Fred Boogerd, Frank Bruggeman, Jan-Hendrik
Hofmeyr and Hans Westerhoff (eds.), 
Systems Biology: Philosophical
Foundations
, New York: Elsevier, 321–336.


Braillard, Pierre-Alain, 2010, “Systems Biology and the
Mechanistic Framework”, 
History and Philosophy of Life
Sciences
, 32: 43–62.


Braillard, Pierre-Alain and Cristophe Malaterre (eds.), 2015,

Explanation in Biology. An Enquiry into the Diversity of
Explanatory Patterns in the Life Sciences
, Dordrecht:
Springer.


Brandon, Robert, 1997, “Does Biology Have Laws? The
Experimental Evidence”, 
Philosophy of Science
, 64:
S444–S457.


Brenner, Sydney, 1963, “Letter to Perutz”, in W.B.
Wood and the Community of 
C. elegans
 Researchers, 1998
(eds.), 
The Nematode Caenorhabditis elegans
, Cold Spring
Harbor, NY: Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press.


–––, 1973, “The Genetics of
Behavior”, 
British Medical Bulletin
, 29:
269–271.


–––, 2001, 
My Life in Science
, London:
BioMed Central Ltd.


Brigandt, Ingo, 2013, “Systems Biology and the Integration
of Mechanistic Explanation and Mathematical Explanation”,

Studies in History and Philosophy of Biological and Biomedical
Sciences
, 44(4): 477–92.


–––, 2018, “Explanation of Molecular
Processes without Tracking Mechanism Operation”, 
Philosophy
of Science
 85: 984–997.


Brigandt, Ingo, Sara Green and Maureen O’Malley, 2017,
“Systems Biology and Mechanistc Explanation”, in Glennan
and Illari (eds.), 
The Routledge Handbook of Mechanisms and
Mechanistic Philosophy
, London, UK: Routledge,
362–374.,


Brock, Thomas D., 1990, 
The Emergence of Bacterial
Genetics
, Cold Spring Harbor, NY: Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
Press.


Brown, Andrew, 2003, 
In the Beginning Was the Worm: Finding
the Secrets of Life in a Tiny Hermaphrodite
, New York: Columbia
University Press.


Burian, Richard M., 1993a, “Technique, Task Definition, and
the Transition from Genetics to Molecular Genetics: Aspects of the
Work on Protein Synthesis in the Laboratories of J. Monod and P.
Zamecnik”, 
Journal of the History of Biology
, 26:
387–407. (Note: This issue has a Special Section: Building
Molecular Biology.)


–––, 1993b, “How the Choice of
Experimental Organism Matters: Epistemological Reflections on an
Aspect of Biological Practice”, 
Journal of the History of
Biology
, 26: 351–367.


Cairns, John, Gunther S. Stent; and James D. Watson (eds.), 1966,

Phage and the Origins of Molecular Biology
, Cold Spring
Harbor, NY: Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press.


Calcott, Brett, 2009, “Lineage Explanations: Explaining How
Biological Mechanisms Change”, 
British Journal for the
Philosophy of Science
, 60: 51–78.


Campbell, Richard, 2015,
The Metaphysics of Emergence
,
London: Palgrave Macmillan.


Canguilhem, Georges, 1989, 
The Normal and the
Pathological
, translated by Carolyn R. Fawcett. New York: Zone
Books.


Cantor, Charles R. and Cassandra M. Smith, 1999,

Genomics
, New York: John Wiley and Sons.


Carlson, Elof A., 1966, 
The Gene: A Critical History
,
Philadelphia: Saunders.


–––, 1971, “An Unacknowledged Founding of
Molecular Biology: H.J. Muller’s Contribution to Gene Theory,
1910–1936”, 
Journal of the History of Biology
, 4:
149–170.


–––, 1981, 
Genes, Radiation and Society: The
Life and Work of H.J. Muller
, Ithaca, New York: Cornell
University Press.


–––, 2011, 
Mutation: The History of an Idea
from Darwin to Genomics
. New York: Cold Spring Harbor Press.


Chow, Louise, Richard Gelinas, Thomas Broker, and Richard Roberts,
1977, “An Amazing Sequence Arrangement at the 5′ Ends of
Adenovirus 2Messenger RNA”, 
Cell
, 12: 1–18.


Clarke, Brendan, G. Gillies, P. Illari, F. Russo, and J.
Williamson, 2014, “Mechanisms and the Evidence Hierarchy”,

Topoi
, 33(2): 339–360.
doi:10.1007/s11245-013-9220-9


Cohen, S., 1984, “The Biochemical Origins of Molecular
Biology”, 
Trends in Biochemical Sciences
, 9:
334–336.


Cook, Thomas D. and Donald T. Campbell, 1979,

Quasi-Experimentation: Design and Analysis Issues for Field
Settings
, Chicago, IL: Rand MacNally.


Craver, Carl F., 2001, “Structures of Scientific
Theories”, in P.K. Machamer and M. Silberstein (eds.),

Blackwell Guide to the Philosophy of Science
, Oxford:
Blackwell, 55–79.


–––, 2007, 
Explaining the Brain
,
Oxford: Oxford University Press.


Craver, Carl F. and Lindley Darden, 2013, 
In Search of
Mechanisms: Discoveries across the Life Sciences
, Chicago, IL:
University of Chicago Press.


Craver, Carl F. and Mark Povich, 2017, “Levels, Reduction,
and Emergence”, in S. Gennan and P. Illari (eds.), Routledge
Handbook of Mechanisms, London: Routledge, 185–197.


Craver, Carl F., Stuart Glennan and Mark Povich, 2021,
“Constitutive Relevance & Mutual Manipulability
Revisited”, 
Synthese
, 199: 8807–8828.


Crick, Francis, 1958, “On Protein Synthesis”,

Symposium of the Society of Experimental Biolog
y 12:
138–163.


–––, 1970, “Central Dogma of Molecular
Biology”, 
Nature
, 227: 561–563.


–––, 1988, 
What Mad Pursuit: A Personal View
of Scientific Discovery
, New York: Basic Books.


–––, 1996, “The Impact of Linus Pauling on
Molecular Biology”, in Ramesh S. Krishnamurthy (ed.), 
The
Pauling Symposium: A Discourse on the Art of Biography
,
Corvallis, Oregon: Oregon State University Libraries Special
Collections, 1–18.


Crow, James F., 1992, “H.J. Muller’s Role in
Evolutionary Biology”, in Sarkar 1992: 83–105.


Culp, Sylvia, 1995, “Objectivity in Experimental Inquiry:
Breaking Data-Technique Circles”, 
Philosophy of
Science
, 62: 438–458.


Culp, Sylvia and Philip Kitcher, 1989, “Theory Structure and
Theory Change in Contemporary Molecular Biology”, 
The
British Journal for the Philosophy of Science
, 40:
459–483.


Darden, Lindley, 1991, 
Theory Change in Science: Strategies
from Mendelian Genetics
, New York: Oxford University Press.


–––, 1995, “Exemplars, Abstractions, and
Anomalies: Representations and Theory Change in Mendelian and
Molecular Genetics”, in Lennox and Wolters 1995:
137–158.


–––, 2002, “Strategies for Discovering
Mechanisms: Schema Instantiation, Modular Subassembly,
Forward/Backward Chaining”, 
Philosophy of Science
, 69
(
Supplement
): S354–S365.


–––, 2005, “Relations Among Fields:
Mendelian, Cytological and Molecular Mechanisms”, 
Studies in
History and Philosophy of Biological and Biomedical Sciences
, 36:
349–371.


–––, 2006a, 
Reasoning in Biological
Discoveries: Essays on Mechanisms, Interfield Relations, and Anomaly
Resolution
, Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.


–––, 2006b, “Flow of Information in
Molecular Biological Mechanisms”, 
Biological Theory
, 1:
280–287.


–––, 2007, “Mechanisms and Models”,
in Hull and Ruse 2007: 139–159.


–––, 2008, “Thinking Again about
Biological Mechanisms”, 
Philosophy of Science
, 75:
958–69.


Darden, Lindley and Carl F. Craver, 2002, “Strategies in the
Interfield Discovery of the Mechanism of Protein Synthesis”,

Studies in History and Philosophy of Biological and Biomedical
Sciences
, 33: 1–28.


Darden, Lindley and Nancy Maull, 1977, “Interfield
Theories”, 
Philosophy of Science
, 44: 43–64.


De Backer, Philippe, Danny De Waele, and Linda Van Speybroeck,
2010, “Ins and Outs of Systems Biology vis-à-vis
Molecular Biology: Continuation or Clear Cut?”, 
Acta
Biotheoretica
, 58: 15–49.


de Chadarevian, Soraya, 2002, 
Designs for Life: Molecular
Biology after World War II
, New York: Cambridge University
Press.


–––, 2003, “Portrait of a Discovery:
Watson, Crick, and the Double Helix”, 
ISIS
, 94:
90–105.


de Chadarevian, Soraya and Jean-Paul Gaudilliere, 1996, “The
Tools of the Discipline: Biochemists and Molecular Biologists”,
Introduction to Special Issue, 
Journal of the History of
Biology
, 29: 327–330.


de Chadarevian, Soraya and Bruno Strasser, 2002,
“Introduction: Molecular Biology in Postwar Europe: Towards a
Global Picture”, Special Issue: Molecular Biology in Postwar
Europe. 
Studies in the History and Philosophy of Science Part C:
Studies in History and Philosophy of Biological and Biomedical
Sciences
, 33: 361–365.


Deichmann, U., 2002, “Emigration, Isolation, and the Slow
Start of Molecular Biology in Germany”, 
Studies in the
History and Philosophy of Science Part C: Studies in History and
Philosophy of Biological and Biomedical Science
, 33:
449–471.


Delbrueck, Max, 1949, “A Physicist Looks at Biology”,

Transactions of the Connecticut Academy of Arts and Sciences
,
38: 173–190.


Delehanty, Megan, 2005, “Emergent Properties and the Context
Objection to Reduction”, 
Biology and Philosophy
, 20:
715–734.


Dietrich, Michael, 1998, “Paradox and Persuasion:
Negotiating the Place of Molecular Evolution within Evolutionary
Biology”, 
Journal of the History of Biology
, 31:
85–111.


Doolittle, W. Ford, 2013, “Is junk DNA bunk? A critique of
ENCODE”, 
Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences
, 110(14): 5294–5300.


Doudna, Jennifer A. and Emmanuelle Charpentier, 2014,
“Genome Editing. The New Frontier of Genome Engineering with
CRISPR-Cas9”, 
Science
, 346: 6213.


Downes, Stephen M., 2004, “Alternative Splicing, the Gene
Concept, and Evolution”, 
History and Philosophy of the Life
Sciences
, 26: 91–104.


–––, 2006, “Genetic Information”, in
Jessica Pfeifer and Sahotra Sarkar (eds.), 
The Philosophy of
Science: An Encyclopedia
, New York: Routledge, 64–68.


Dupre, John, 2012, 
Processes of Life. Essays in the Philosophy
of Biology
, Oxford: Oxford University Press.


Echols, Harrison, 2001, 
Operators and Promoters: The Story of
Molecular Biology and Its Creators
, Berkeley, CA: University of
California Press.


Elitzur, A.C., 1995, “Life and Mind, Past and Future:
Schroedinger’s Vision Fifty Years Later”, 
Perspectives
in Biology and Medicine
, 38: 433–457.


The ENCODE Project Consortium, 2012, “An Integrated
Encyclopedia of DNA Elements in the Human Genome”,

Nature
, 489, 7414: 57–74.


Falk, Raphael, 1986, “What Is a Gene?”, 
Studies in
History and Philosophy of Science
, 17: 133–173.


–––, 2001, “Can the Norm of Reaction Save
the Gene Concept?”, in Rama S. Singh, Costas B. Krimbas, Diana
B. Paul, and John Beatty (eds.), 
Thinking About Evolution:
Historical, Philosophical, and Political Perspectives
, New York:
Cambridge University Press, 119–140.


Fagan, Melinda B., 2013, 
Philosophy of Stem Cell Biology:
Knowledge in Flesh and Blood
, New York, NY: Palgrave
Macmillan.


–––, 2021, 
Stem Cells
, Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.


Fazekas, Peter, 2022, “Flat Mechanisms: A Reductionist
Approach to Levels in Mechanistic Explanations”,

Philosophical Studies
, 179(7): 2303–2321.


Fischer, Ernst Peter and Carol Lipson, 1988, 
Thinking about
Science: Max Delbrueck and the Origins of Molecular Biology
, New
York: W.W. Norton.


Fisher, Susie, 2010, “Not Beyond Reasonable Doubt: Howard
Temin’s Provirus Hypothesis Revisited”, 
Journal of the
History of Biology
, 43: 661–696.


Fleischmann, R.D., M.D. Adams, O. White, R.A. Clayton, E.F.
Kirkness, A.R. Kerlavage, C.J. Bult, J.F. Tomb, B.A. Dougherty, and
J.M. Merrick et al., 1995, “Whole-Genome Random Sequencing and
Assembly of 
Haemophilus influenzae
”, 
Science
,
269: 496–512.


Fleming, D., 1968, “Emigre Physicists and the Biological
Revolution”, 
Perspectives in American History
, 2:
176–213.


Frost-Arnold, Gregory, 2004, “How to be an Anti-Reductionist
about Developmental Biology”, 
Biology and Philosophy
,
19: 75–91.


Gannett, Lisa, 2003, “The Normal Genome in Twentieth-Century
Evolutionary Thought”, 
Studies in History and Philosophy of
Biological and Biomedical Sciences
, 34: 143–185.


Garcia-Sancho, Miguel, 2012, 
Biology, Computing, and the
History of Molecular Biology Sequencing: From Proteins to DNA,
1945–2000
, New York: Palgrave Macmillan.


Germain, Pierre Luc, Emanuele Ratti, and Federico Boem, 2014,
“Junk or Functional DNA? ENCODE and the Function
Controversy”, 
Biology and Philosophy
, 29:
807–831.


Gerstein, M.B. et al., 2007, “What is a Gene, post-ENCODE?
History and Updated Definition”, 
Genome Research
, 17:
669–681.


Glennan, Stuart, 2002, “Rethinking Mechanistic
Explanation”, 
Philosophy of Science
, 69

(Supplement)
: S342–S353.


Glennan, Stuart and Phyllis Illari (eds.), 2017, 
The Routledge
Handbook of Mechanisms and Mechanical Philosophy
. London, UK:
Routledge.


Goff, S.A. et al., 2002, “A Draft Sequence of the Rice
Genome”, 
Science
, 296: 92–100.


Green, Sara (ed.), 2017, 
Philosophy of Systems Biology:
Perspectives from Scientists and Philosophers
. Dordrecht:
Springer.


Griffiths, Paul E. and Robert D. Knight, 1998, “What is the
Developmentalist Challenge?”, 
Philosophy of Science
,
65: 253–258.


Griffiths, Paul E. and Eva M. Neumann-Held, 1999, “The Many
Faces of the Gene”, 
BioScience
, 49: 656–662.


Griffiths, Paul E. and Karola Stotz, 2004, “Genes:
Philosophical Analyses Put to the Test”, 
History and
Philosophy of the Life Sciences
, 26: 5–28.


–––, 2006, “Genes in the Postgenomic
Era”, 
Theoretical Medicine and Bioethics
, 27:
499–521.


–––, 2007, “Gene”, in Hull and Ruse
2007: 85–102.


–––, 2013, 
Genetics and Philosophy: An
Introduction
, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.


Griffiths, Paul E., Arnaud Pocheville, Brett Calcott, Karola
Stotz, Hyunju Kim and Rob Knight, 2015, “Measuring Causal
Specificity”, 
Philosophy of Science
, 82:
529–555.


Hager, Thomas, 1995, 
Force of Nature: The Life of Linus
Pauling
, New York: Simon and Schuster.


Harinen, Totte, 2014, “Mutual Manipulability and Causal
Inbetweenness”, 
Synthese
 195: 34–54.


Hausmann, Rudolf, 2002, 
To Grasp the Essence of Life: A
History of Molecular Biology
. Dordrecht: Springer.


Havstad, Joyce C. & Palazzo, Alexander F, 2022, “Not
functional yet a difference maker: junk DNA as a case study,”

Biology and Philosophy
, 37(4): 1–27.


Hempel, Carl and P. Oppenheim, 1948, “Studies in the Logic
of Explanation”, 
Philosophy of Science
, 15:
135–175.


Hernán, Miguel A. and Tyler J. Vanderweele, 2011,
“Compound Treatments and Transportability of Causal
Inference”, 
Epidemiology
, 22(3): 368–77.


Hershey, Alfred D. and Martha Chase, 1952, “Independent
Functions of Viral Protein and Nucleic Acid in Growth of
Bacteriophage”, 
The Journal of General Physiology
, 36:
39–56.


Holmes, Frederic Lawrence, 2001, 
Meselson, Stahl, and the
Replication of DNA: A History of “The Most Beautiful Experiment
in Biology”
, New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.


Howick, Jeremy, P. Glasziou, and J.K. Aronson, 2013,
“Problems with Using Mechanisms to Solve the Problem of
Extrapolation”, 
Theoretical Medicine and Bioethics
, 34:
275–291.


Huber, L., and L. K. Keuck, 2013, “Mutant mice: Experimental
organisms as materialized models in biomedicine”, 
Studies in
History and Philosophy of Science C: Studies in History and Philosophy
of Biological and Biomedical Sciences
, 44: 385–391.


Hull, David, 1974, 
Philosophy of Biological Science
,
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.


Hull, David L. and Michael Ruse (eds.), 2007, 
Cambridge
Companion to Philosophy of Biology
, New York: Cambridge
University Press.


Huettemann, Andreas and Alan C. Love, 2011, “Aspects of
Reductive Explanation in Biological Science: Instrinsicality,
Fundamentality, and Temporality”, 
British Journal for the
Philosophy of Science
, 62: 519–549.


Ilan, Yaron, 2020, “Order Through Disorder: The
Characteristic Variability of Systems”, 
Frontiers in Cell
and Developmental Biology
, 8: 186.


Illari, Phyllis McKay and Jon Williamson, 2012, “What is a
Mechanism? Thinking about Mechanisms 
Across
 the
Sciences”, 
European Journal for Philosophy of Science
,
2(1): 119–135.


International HapMap Consortium, 2003, “The International
HapMap Project”, 
Nature
, 426: 789–796.


International Human Genome Sequencing Consortium, 2001,
“Initial Sequencing and Analysis of the Human Genome”,

Nature
, 409: 860–921.


Ioannidis, Stavros and Stathis Psillos, 2017, “In defense of
methodological mechanism”, 
Axiomathes
, 27:
601–619.


Jablonka, Eva, 2002, “Information: Its Interpretation, Its
Inheritance, and Its Sharing”, 
Philosophy of Science
,
69: 578–605.


Jacob, Francois, 1988, 
The Statue Within: An
Autobiography
, New York: Basic Books.


Jacob, Francois and Jacques Monod, 1961, “Genetic Regulatory
Mechanisms in the Synthesis of Proteins”, 
Journal of
Molecular Biology
, 3: 318–356.


Jaeger, Johannes, David Irons and Nick Monk, 2012 “The
inheritance of process: a dynamical systems approach”,

Journal of Experimental Zoology Part B Molecular and Developmental
Evolution
, 318: 591–612.


Jaeger, Johannes and Nick Monk 2015, “Everything flows: a
process perspective on life”, 
EMBO Reports
, 16:
1064–1067.


Judson, Horace Freeland, 1980, “Reflections on the
Historiography of Molecular Biology”, 
Minerv
a 18:
369–421.


–––, 1992, “A History of the Science and
Technology Behind Gene Mapping and Sequencing”, in Kevles and
Hood 1992: 37–80.


–––, 1996, 
The Eighth Day of Creation: The
Makers of the Revolution in Biology
, Expanded Edition. Cold
Spring Harbor, NY: Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press.


Kay, Lily E., 1993, 
The Molecular Vision of Life: Caltech, The
Rockefeller Foundation, and The Rise of the New Biology
, New
York: Oxford University Press.


–––, 2000, 
Who Wrote the Book of Life? A
History of the Genetic Code
, Stanford, CA: Stanford University
Press.


Keller, Evelyn Fox, 1990, “Physics and the Emergence of
Molecular Biology: A History of Cognitive and Political
Synergy”, 
Journal of the History of Biology
, 23:
389–409.


–––, 1999, “Understanding
Development”, 
Biology and Philosophy
, 14:
321–330.


–––, 2000, 
The Century of the Gene
,
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.


Kendrew, John, 1967, “How Molecular Biology Started”,
Review of J. Cairns, G. Stent and J. Watson (eds.), 
Phage and the
Origins of Molecular Biology
, in 
Scientific American
,
216: 141–144.


Kevles, Daniel and Leroy Hood (eds.), 1992, 
The Code of Codes:
Scientific and Social Issues in the Human Genome Project
.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.


Kitcher, Philip, 1982, “Genes”, 
The British
Journal for the Philosophy of Science
, 33: 337–359.


–––, 1984, “1953 and All That: A Tale of
Two Sciences”, 
The Philosophical Review
, 93:
335–373.


–––, 1989, “Explanatory Unification and
the Causal Structure of the World”, in Philip Kitcher and Wesley
Salmon (eds.), 
Scientific Explanation
, Minnesota Studies in
the Philosophy of Science, v. 13. Minneapolis, MN: University of
Minnesota Press, 410–505.


–––, 1993, 
The Advancement of Science:
Science without Legend, Objectivity without Illusions
, New York:
Oxford University Press.


–––, 1999, “The Hegemony of Molecular
Biology”, 
Biology and Philosophy
, 14:
195–210.


Kohler, Robert E., 1994, 
Lords of the Fly
: 
Drosophila
Genetics and the Experimental Life
, Chicago, IL: University of
Chicago Press.


Kõiv, Riin, 2020, “Elusive vehicles of genetic
representation”, 
Biology and Philosophy
, 35(1):
1–24.


Kornberg, Arthur, 1989, 
For the Love of Enzymes: The Odyssey
of a Biochemist
, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.


Kupiec, Jean-Jacques, Olivier Gandrillon, Michel Morange and Marc
Silberstein (eds.), 2011, 
Le hasard au coeur de la cellule:
Probabilités, déterminisme,
génétique
, Paris: Éditions
Matériologiques.


LaFollette, H. and N. Shanks, 1996, 
Brute Science: Dilemmas of
Animal Experimentation
, London: Routledge.


Lange, Marc, 2000, 
Natural Laws in Scientific Practice
,
Oxford: Oxford University Press.


Laubichler, Manfred D. and Gunter P. Wagner, 2001, “How
Molecular is Molecular Developmental Biology? A Reply to Alex
Rosenberg’s Reductionism Redux: Computing the Embryo”,

Biology and Philosophy
, 16: 53–68.


Lean, Olive M., 2020, “Binding Specificity and Causal
Selection in Drug Design”, 
Philosophy of Science
,
87(1): 70–80.


Lemoine, Mael, 2017, “Animal extrapolation in preclinical
studies: An analysis of the tragic case of TGN1412”, 
Studies
in History and Philosophy of Biological and Biomedical Sciences
,
61: 35–45.


Lennox, James G. and Gereon Wolters (eds.), 1995, 
Concepts,
Theories, and Rationality in the Biological Sciences
, Pittsburgh,
PA: University of Pittsburgh Press.


Leonelli, Sabina, 2016, 
Data-Centric Biology: A Philosophical
Study
, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.


Lewontin, Richard C., 1968, “Essay Review of 
Phage and
the Origins of Molecular Biology
”, 
Journal of the
History of Biology
, 1: 155–161.


Little, Peter, 2003, “DNA Sequencing: The Silent
Revolution”, in Laura Garwin and Tim Lincoln (eds.), 
A
Century of Nature: Twenty-one Discoveries that Changed Science and the
World
, Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.


Logan, Cheryl A., 2002, “Before There Were Standards: The
Role of Test Animals in the Production of Scientific Generality in
Physiology”, 
Journal of the History of Biology
, 35:
329–63.


Love, Alan C., 2009, “Typology Reconfigured: From the
Metaphysics of Essentialism to the Epistemology of
Representation”, 
Acta Biotheoretica
, 57:
51–57.


Love, Alan, I. Brigandt, K. Stotz, D. Schweitzer, and A.
Rosenberg, 2008, “Review Symposium of Alex Rosenberg’s

Darwinian Reductionism
”, 
Metascience
, 17:
1–26.


Love, Alan C. and Marco J. Nathan, 2015, “The Idealization
of Causation in Mechanistic Explanation”, 
Philosophy of
Science
, 82: 761–74.


Luc-Germain, Pierre, Emanuele Ratti, and Federico Boem, 2015,
“Junk or Functional DNA? Encode and the Function
Controversy”, 
Biology and Philosophy
 29:
807–831.


Luria, Salvador E., 1984, 
A Slot Machine, A Broken Test Tube:
An Autobiography
, New York: Harper & Row.


Machamer, Peter, 2004, “Activities and Causation: The
Metaphysics and Epistemology of Mechanisms”, 
International
Studies in the Philosophy of Science
, 18: 27–39.


Machamer, Peter, Lindley Darden, and Carl F. Craver, 2000,
“Thinking About Mechanisms”, 
Philosophy of
Science
, 67: 1–25.


Maddox, Brenda, 2002, 
Rosalind Franklin: The Dark Lady of
DNA
, New York: HarperCollins.


Marco, Nathan, 2012, “The Varieties of Molecular
Explanation”, 
Philosophy of Science
, 79:
233–254.


Marcum, James, 2002, “From Heresy to Dogma in Accounts of
Opposition to Howard Temin’s DNA Provirus Hypothesis”,

History and Philosophy of the Life Sciences
, 24:
165–192.


Marcum, James, 2007, “Experimental Series and the
Justification of Temin’s DNA Provirus Hypothesis”,

Synthese
, 154: 259–92.


Marder, Eve and Aadam L. Taylor, 2011, “Multiple Models to
Capture the Variability in Biological Neurons and Networks”,

Nature Neuroscience
, 14: 133–38.


Matlin, Karl S., 2022, 
Crossing the Boundaries of Life:
Günter Blobel and the Origins of Molecular Cell Biology
,
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.


Maxam, Allan M. and Walter Gilbert, 1977, “A New Method for
Sequencing DNA”, 
Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences (USA)
, 74: 560–564.


Maynard Smith, John, 2000, “The Concept of Information in
Biology”, 
Philosophy of Science
, 67(2):
177–194.


McKaughan, Daniel J., 2005, “The Influence of Niels Bohr on
Max Delbrueck: Revisiting the Hopes Inspired by ‘Light and
Life’”, 
ISIS
, 96: 507–529.


Meincke, Anne Sophie, 2018, “Autopoiesis Biological Autonomy
and the Process View of Life”, 
PEuropean Journal of
Philosophy of Science
, 9: 5.


Meselson, Matthew and Frank A. Stahl, 1958, “The Replication
of DNA in 
E.coli
”, 
Proceedings of the National
Academy of Science (USA)
, 44: 671–682.


Mitchell, Sandra D., 1997, “Pragmatic Laws”,

Philosophy of Science
, 64: S468–S479.


–––, 2009, 
Unsimple Truths: Science,
Complexity, and Policy
, Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.


Mitchell, Sandra D. and Angela M. Gronenborn, 2017, “After
Fifty Years, Why Are Protein X-ray Crystallographers Still in
Business?”, 
The British Journal for the Philosophy of
Science
, 68: 703–23.


Moore, Walter J., 1989, 
Schroedinger: Life and Thought
,
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.


Morange, Michel, 1997a, “The Transformation of Molecular
Biology on Contact with Higher Organisms, 1960–1980: From a
Molecular Description to a Molecular Explanation”, 
History
and Philosophy of the Life Sciences
, 19: 369–393.


–––, 1997b, “From the Regulatory Vision of
Cancer to the Oncogene Paradigm, 1975–1985”, 
Journal
of the History of Biology
, 30: 1–29.


–––, 2006, “Post-genomics, between
Reduction and Emergence”, 
Synthese
, 151:
355–360.


–––, 2008, “The Death of Molecular
Biology?”, 
History and Philosophy of the Life Sciences
,
30: 31–42.


–––, 2020, 
The Black Box of Biology: A
History of the Molecular Revolution
, Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.


Morgan, Thomas H., 1926, 
The Theory of the Gene
, New
Haven, CT: Yale University Press.


Morgan, Thomas H., Alfred H. Sturtevant, Hermann J. Muller, and C.
B. Bridges, 1915, 
The Mechanism of Mendelian Heredity
, New
York: Henry Holt and Company.


Moss, Lenny, 2001, “Deconstructing the Gene and
Reconstructing Molecular Developmental Systems”, in Oyama,
Griffiths, and Gray 2001: 85–97.


–––, 2002, 
What Genes Can’t Do
,
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.


Muller, Hermann J., [1926] 1929, “The Gene as the Basis of
Life”, 
Proceedings of the International Congress of Plant
Science
, 1: 897–921.


–––, 1927, “Artificial Transmutation of
the Gene”, 
Science
, 66: 84–87.


–––, 1936, “Physics in the Attack on the
Fundamental Problems of Genetics”, 
Scientific Monthly
,
44: 210–214.


Nagel, Ernest, 1961, 
The Structure of Science
, New York:
Harcourt, Brace and World.


Nelson, Nicole C., 2013, “Modeling mouse, human, and
discipline: Epistemic scaffolds in animal behavior genetics”,

Social Studies of Science
, 43: 3–29.


–––, 2018, 
Model Behavior: Animal
Experiments, Complexity, and the Genetics of Psychiatric
Disorders
. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.


Neumann-Held, Eva M., 1999, “The Gene is Dead—Long
Live the Gene: Conceptualizing Genes the Constructivist Way”, in
P. Koslowski (ed.), 
Sociobiology and Bioeconomics: The Theory of
Evolution in Biological and Economic Theory
, Berlin:
Springer-Verlag, 105–137.


–––, 2001, “Let’s Talk About Genes:
The Process Molecular Gene Concept and Its Context”, in Oyama,
Griffiths, and Gray 2001: 69–84.


Nicholson, Daniel J. and John Dupre (eds.), 2018, 
Everything
Flows. Towards a Processual Philosophy of Biology
, Oxford: Oxford
University Press.


Ohta, N. and T. Kuroiwa, 2002, “Origin and Evolution of the
Plant Genome; with a Focus on Mitochondrial and Plastid
Genomes”, in Yoshikawa, Ogasawara, and Satoh 2002:
201–211.


Okasha, Samir, forthcoming, “Cancer and the Levels of
Selection”, 
The British Journal for the Philosophy of
Science
.
[
Publisher’s preprint of Okasha forthcoming available online.
]


Olby, Robert, 1970, “Francis Crick, DNA, and the Central
Dogma”, in Gerald Holton (ed.), 
The Twentieth Century
Sciences
, New York: W.W. Norton, 227–280.


–––, 1979, “The Significance of the
Macromolecules in the Historiography of Molecular Biology”,

History and Philosophy of Life Sciences
,
1:185–198.


–––, 1990, “The Molecular Revolution in
Biology”, in R.C. Olby, G.N. Cantor, J.R.R. Christie, and M.
J.S. Hodge (eds.), 
Companion to the History of Modern
Science
, New York: Routledge, 503–520.


–––, 1994, 
The Path to the Double Helix: The
Discovery of DNA
, Revised Edition, Mineola, New York: Dover.


–––, 2003, “Quiet Debut for the Double
Helix”, 
Nature
, 421: 402–405.


–––, 2009, 
Francis Crick: Hunter of
Life’s Secrets
, Woodbury, NY: Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
Press.


Oyama, Susan, Paul E. Griffiths, and Russell Gray (eds.), 2001,

Cycles of Contingency: Developmental Systems and Evolution
,
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.


Pauling, Linus, 1939, 
The Nature of the Chemical Bond
,
Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.


–––, 1970, “Fifty Years of Progress in
Structural Chemistry and Molecular Biology”, 
Daedalus
,
99: 988–1014.


Pearl, Judea, and Elias Bareinboim, 2014, “External
Validity: From do-Calculus to Transportability across
Populations”, 
Statistical Science
, 29:
579–95.


Pigliucci, Massimo, 2013, “Between Holism and Reductionism:
A Philosophical Primer on Emergence”, 
Biological Journal of
the Linnean Society
, 112(2): 261–267.


Piotrowska, Monika, 2009, “What Does It Mean to Be 75%
Pumpkin? The Units of Comparative Genomics”, 
Philosophy of
Science
, 76: 838–850.


–––, 2013, “From Humanized Mice to Human
Disease: Guiding Extrapolation from Model to Target”,

Biology and Philosophy
, 28: 439–455.


Plomin, Robert, John C. DeFries, Ian W. Craig, and Peter McGuffin
(eds.), 2003, 
Behavioral Genetics in the Post-genomic Era
,
Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.


Podolsky, Scott H. and Alfred I. Tauber, 1997, 
The Generation
of Diversity: Clonal Selection Theory and the Rise of Molecular
Immunology
, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.


Pontius, J.U. et al., 2007, “Initial Sequence and
Comparative Analysis of the Cat Genome”, 
Genome
Research
, 17: 1675–1689.


Popper, Karl, 1965, 
The Logic of Scientific Discovery
.
New York: Harper and Row.


Portin, Peter, 1993, “The Concept of the Gene: Short History
and Present Status”, 
The Quarterly Review of Biology
,
68: 173–223.


Powell, Alexander, Maureen A. O’Malley, Staffan
Mueller-Wille, Jane Calvert, and John Dupre, 2007, “Disciplinary
Baptisms: A Comparison of the Naming Stories of Genetics, Molecular
Biology, Genomics, and Systems Biology”, 
History and
Philosophy of the Life Science
s 29: 5–32.


Powell, Alexander and John Dupre, 2009, “From Molecules to
Systems: The Importance of Looking Both Ways”, 
Studies in
the History and Philosophy of Biological and Biomedical Sciences
,
40: 54–64.


Pradeu, Thomas, Bertrand Daignan-Fornier, Andrew Ewald, Pierre-Luc
Germain, Samir Okasha, Anya Plutynski, Sébastien Benzekry,
Marta Bertolaso, Mina Bissell, Joel S. Brown, Benjamin Chin-Yee, Ian
Chin-Yee, Hans Clevers, Laurent Cognet, Marie Darrason, Emmanuel
Fargen, Jean Feunteun, Jérôme Galon, Elodie Giroux, Sara
Green, Fridolin Gross, Fanny Jaulin, Rob Knight, Ezio Laconi, Nicolas
Larmonier, Carlo Maley, Alberto Mantovani, Violaine Moreau, Pierre
Nassoy, Elena Rondeau, David Santamaria, Catherine M. Sawai, Andrei
Seluanov, Gregory D. Sepich-Poore, Vanja Sisirak, Eric Solary, Sarah
Yvonnet and Lucie Laplane, 2023, “Reuniting Philosophy and
Science to Advance Cancer Research”, 
Biological Reviews of
the Cambridge Philosophical Society
, 98(5): 1668–1686.
doi:10.1111/brv.12971


Rabinow, Paul, 1996, 
Making PCR: A Story of
Biotechnology
, Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.


Reiss, Julian, 2010, “Review of 
Across the Boundaries:
Extrapolation in Biology and Social Science
, Daniel P. Steel.
Oxford University Press, 2007”, 
Economics and
Philosophy
, 26: 382–390.


Rheinberger, Hans-Joerg, 1997, “Experimental Complexity in
Biology: Some Epistemological and Historical Remarks”,

Philosophy of Science
, 64: S245–S54.


–––, 1997, 
Towards a History of Epistemic
Things: Synthesizing Proteins in the Test Tube
, Stanford, CA:
Stanford University Press.


Rheinberger, Hans-Jorg and Staffan Muller-Wille, 2018, 
The
Gene: From Genetics to Postgenomics
, Chicago, IL: The University
of Chicago Press.


Richardson, Robert and Achim Stephan, 2007, “Mechanism and
Mechanical Explanation in Systems Biology”, in Fred Boogerd,
Frank Bruggeman, Jan-Hendrik Hofmeyr and Hans Westerhoff (eds.),

Systems Biology: Philosophical Foundations
, New York:
Elsevier, 123–144.


Robert, Jason Scott, 2001, “Interpreting the Homeobox:
Metaphors of Gene Action and Activation in Development and
Evolution”, 
Evolution and Development
, 3:
287–295.


–––, 2004, 
Embryology, Epigenesis, and
Evolution: Taking Development Seriously
, New York: Cambridge
University Press.


Roll-Hansen, Nils, 1978, “
Drosophila
 Genetics: A
Reductionist Research Program”, 
Journal of the History of
Biology
, 11:159–210.


–––, 2000, “The Application of
Complementarity to Biology: From Niels Bohr to Max Delbrueck”,

Historical Studies in the Physical and Biological Sciences
,
30: 417–442.


Rosenberg, Alex, 1997, “Reductionism Redux: Computing the
Embryo”, 
Biology and Philosophy
, 12:
445–470.


–––, 2006, 
Darwinian Reductionism: Or, How
to Stop Worrying and Love Molecular Biology
, Chicago, IL:
University of Chicago Press.


–––, 2020, 
Reduction and Mechanism
.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.


Ross, Lauren N., 2018, “Causal Concepts in Biology: How
Pathways Differ from Mechanisms and Why it Matters” 
The
British Journal for the Philosophy of Science
, 72 (1):
131–58.


Russo, Federica, 2010, “Comparative Process Tracing: Yet
Another Virtue of Mechanisms?” 
Journal of Economic
Methodology
, 17: 81–87.


Saiki, Randall K., Stephen Scharf, Fred Faloona, Kary B. Mullis,
Glenn T. Horn, Henry A. Erlich, and Norman Arnheim, 1985,
“Enzymatic Amplification of Beta-Globin Genomic Sequences and
Restriction Site Analysis for Diagnosis of Sickle Cell Anemia”,

Science
, 230: 1350–1354.


Salmon, Wesley, 1984, 
Scientific Explanation and the Causal
Structure of the World
, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
Press.


–––, 1998, 
Causality and Explanation
,
Oxford: Oxford University Press.


Sanger, Frederick, 1988, “Sequences, Sequences, and
Sequences”, 
Annual Review of Biochemistry
, 57:
1–28.


Sapp, Jan, 1992, “Essay Review: Portraying Molecular
Biology”, 
Journal of the History of Biology
, 25:
149–155.


Sarkar, Sahotra, 1991, “
What is Life?

Revisited”, 
BioScience
, 41: 631–634.


––– (ed.), 1992, 
The Founders of
Evolutionary Genetics
, Dordrecht: Kluwer.


–––, 1996a, “Philosophy, History, and
Molecular Biology—Introduction”, in Sarkar 1996d:
1–13.


–––, 1996b, “Biological Information: A
Skeptical Look at Some Central Dogmas of Molecular Biology”, in
Sarkar 1996d: 187–231.


–––, 1996c, “Decoding
‘Coding’—Information and DNA”,

BioScience
, 46: 857–864.


––– (ed.), 1996d, 
The Philosophy and History
of Molecular Biology: New Perspectives
, Dordrecht: Kluwer.


–––, 1998, 
Genetics and Reductionism
,
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.


–––, 2000, “Information in Genetics and
Developmental Biology”, 
Philosophy of Science
, 67:
208–213.


–––, 2005, 
Molecular Models of Life:
Philosophical Papers on Molecular Biology
, Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.


Schaffner, Kenneth, 1974a, “Logic of Discovery and
Justification in Regulatory Genetics”, 
Studies in History
and Philosophy of Science
, 4: 349–385.


–––, 1974b, “The Peripherality of
Reductionism in the Development of Molecular Genetics”,

Journal of the History of Biolog
y 7: 111–139.


–––, 1986, “Exemplar Reasoning about
Biological Models and Diseases: A Relation Between the Philosophy of
Medicine and Philosophy of Science”, 
Journal of Medicine and
Philosophy
, 11: 63–80.


–––, 1993, 
Discovery and Explanation in
Biology and Medicine
, Chicago, IL: University of Chicago
Press.


–––, 2001, “Extrapolation from Animal
Models: Social Life, Sex, and SuperModels”, in P.K. Machamer, R.
Grush, P. McLaughlin (eds.), 
Theory and Method in the
Neurosciences
, Pittsburgh, PA: University of Pittsburgh Press,
200–230.


–––, 2006, “Reduction: The Cheshire Cat
Problem and a Return to Roots”, 
Synthese
, 151:
377–402.


Schroedinger, Erwin, 1944, 
What is Life?
, Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press.


Shannon, C.E. and W. Weaver, 1949, 
The Mathematical Theory of
Communication
, Urbana: University of Illinois Press.


Silberstein, Michael and Anthony Chemero 2013, “Constraints
on Localization and Decomposition as Explanatory Strategies in the
Biological Sciences”, 
Philosophy of Science
, 80:
958–970.


Siva, Nayanah, 2008, “1000 genomes project”,

Nature Biotechnology
, 26(3): 256.


Sloan, Philip R. and Brandon Fogel (eds.), 2011, 
Creating a
Physical Biology: The Three-Man Paper and Early Molecular
Biology
. Chicago, IL: The University of Chicago Press.


Smart, J.C.C., 1963, 
Philosophy and Scientific Realism
,
London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.


Sober, Elliott, 1997, “Two Outbreaks of Lawlessness in
Recent Philosophy of Biology”, 
Philosophy of Science
,
64: S458–S467.


Southern, Edwin Mellor, 1975, “Detection of Specific
Sequences among DNA Fragments Separated by Gel Electrophoresis”,

Journal of Molecular Biology
, 98: 503–517.


Srinivasan, J. and R.J. Sommer, 2002, “From Evolutionary
Developmental Biology to Genomics: Towards a Genome Map of the
Free-Living Nematode”, in Yoshikawa, Ogasawara, and Satoh 2002:
101–110.


Steel, Daniel, 2008, 
Across the Boundaries. Extrapolation in
Biology and Social Science
. Oxford: Oxford University Press.


Stegenga, Jacob, 2011, “The Chemical Characterization of the
Gene: Vicissitudes of Evidential Assessment”, 
History and
Philosophy of the Life Sciences
, 33: 105–127.


Stegmann, Ulrich E., 2005, “Genetic Information as
Instructional Content”, 
Philosophy of Science
, 72:
425–443.


–––, 2009, “DNA, Inference, and
Information”, 
British Journal for the Philosophy of
Science
, 60: 1–17.


Stent, Gunther S., 1968, “That Was the Molecular Biology
that Was”, 
Science
, 160: 390–395.


–––, 1969, 
The Coming of the Golden Age: A
View of the End of Progress
, Garden City, New York: American
Museum of Natural History Press.


Sterelny, Kim and Paul E. Griffiths, 1999, 
Sex and Death: An
Introduction to Philosophy of Biology
, Chicago, IL: University of
Chicago Press.


Stevens, Hallam, 2013, 
Life Out of Sequence: A Data-Driven
History of Bioinformatics
. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago
Press.


Stotz, Karola, 2006, “With Genes Like That, Who Needs an
Environment? Postgenomics’ Arguments for the ‘Ontogeny of
Information’”, 
Philosophy of Science
, 73:
905–917.


Stotz, Karola, Paul E. Griffiths, and Rob E. Knight, 2004,
“How Biologists Conceptualize Genes: An Empirical Study”,

Studies in the History and Philosophy of Biological and Biomedical
Sciences
, 35: 647–673.


Summers, William C., 2023, 
The American Phage Group: Founders
of Molecular Biology
, New Haven: Yale University Press.


Sustar, Predrag, 2007, “Crick’s Notion of Genetic
Information and the ‘Central Dogma’ of Molecular
Biology”, 
British Journal for the Philosophy of
Science
, 58: 13–24.


Tabery, James, 2004, “Synthesizing Activities and
Interactions in the Concept of a Mechanism”, 
Philosophy of
Science
, 71: 1–15,


–––, 2009, “Difference Mechanisms:
Explaining Variation with Mechanisms”, 
Biology and
Philosophy
, 24: 645–664.


–––, 2014, 
Beyond Versus: The Struggle to
Understand the Interaction of Nature and Nurture
. Cambridge: The
MIT Press.


Taniguchi, H., Y. Murata et al., 2002, “Toward the Global
Analysis of Cellular Signaling Pathways”, in Yoshikawa,
Ogasawara and Satoh 2002: 43–50.


Vallejos-Baccelliere, Gabriel and Davide Vecchi, 2024,
“Searching for Protein Folding Mechanisms: On the Insoluble
Contrast between Thermodynamic and Kinetic Explanatory
Approaches”, in João L. Cordovil, Gil Santos and Davide
Vecchi (eds.), 
New Mechanism: Explanation, Emergence and
Reduction, Cham: Springer.


van Holde, Kensal E. and Jordanka Zlatanova, 2018, 
The
Evolution of Molecular Biology: The Search for the Secrets of
Life
. London, UK: Academic Press.


Van Regenmortel, Marc H. and David L. Hull (eds.), 2002,

Promises and Limits of Reductionism in the Biomedical
Sciences
, Chichester, UK: Wiley.


Venter, J. Craig et al., 2001, “The Sequence of the Human
Genome”, 
Science
, 291: 1304–1351.


Waters, C. Kenneth, 1990, “Why the Anti-reductionist
Consensus Won’t Survive the Case of Classical Mendelian
Genetics”, in Arthur Fine, Micky Forbes and Linda Wessels
(eds.), 
Proceedings of the Biennial Meeting of the Philosophy of
Science Association
, 1: 125–139.


–––, 1994, “Genes Made Molecular”,

Philosophy of Science
, 61: 163–185.


–––, 1998, “Causal Regularities in the
Biological World of Contingent Distributions”, 
Biology and
Philosophy
, 13: 5–36.


–––, 2000, “Molecules Made
Biological”, 
Revue Internationale de Philosophie
, 4:
539–564.


–––, 2004, “What Was Classical
Genetics?”, 
Studies in History and Philosophy of
Science
, 35: 783–809.


–––, 2007, “Causes that Make a
Difference”, 
Journal of Philosophy
, 104:
551–579.


–––, 2008, “Beyond Theoretical Reduction
and Layer-Cake Antireduction: How DNA Retooled Genetics and
Transformed Biological Practices”, Michael Ruse (ed.), 
The
Oxford Handbook of Philosophy of Biology
, New York: Oxford
University Press, 238–262.


Waterson, R.H. et al., 2002, “Initial Sequencing and
Comparative Analysis of the Mouse Genome”, 
Nature
, 420:
520–562.


Watson, James D., 1965, 
Molecular Biology of the Gene
,
New York: W.A. Benjamin.


–––, 1968, 
The Double Helix
, New York:
New American Library.


–––, 2002, 
Genes, Girls, and Gamow
, New
York: Knopf.


–––, 2007, 
Avoid Boring People: Lessons from
a Life in Science
, New York: Alfred A Knopf.


Watson, J.D. and F.H.C. Crick, 1953a, “A Structure for
Deoxyribose Nucleic Acid”, 
Nature
, 171:
737–738.


Watson, J.D. and F.H.C. Crick, 1953b, “Genetical
Implications of the Structure of Deoxyribonucleic Acid”,

Nature
, 171: 964–967.


Watson, James D., Nancy H. Hopkins, Jeffrey W. Roberts, Joan
Argetsinger Steitz, and Alan M. Weiner, 1988, 
Molecular Biology of
the Gene
, Fourth Edition. Menlo Park, CA: Benjamin/Cummings.


Weber, Marcel, 2005, 
Philosophy of Experimental Biology
,
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.


–––, 2006, “The ‘Central Dogma of
Molecular Biology’ as a Thesis of Causal Specificity”,

History and Philosophy of the Life Sciences
, 28:
565–610.


–––, 2008, “Critical Notice: 
Darwinian
Reductionism
”, 
Biology and Philosophy
, 23:
143–152.


–––, 2009, “The Crux of Crucial
Experiments: Duhem’s Problems and Inference to the Best
Explanation”, 
British Journal for the Philosophy of
Science
, 60: 19–49.


–––, 2017, “Which Kind of Causal
Specificity Matters Biologically?” 
Philosophy of
Science
, 84(3): 574–585.


–––, 2023, “The Reduction of Classical
Experimental Embryology to Molecular Developmental Biology: A Tale of
Three Sciences”, in William C. Bausman, Janella K. Baxter, and
Oliver M. Lean (eds.), 
From Biological Practice to Scientific
Metaphysics
, Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.


Weiner, Jonathan, 1999, 
Time, Love, and Memory: A Great
Biologist and His Quest for the Origins of Behavior
, New York:
Alfred A. Knopf.


Wilkins, Maurice, 2003, 
The Third Man of the Double Helix: The
Autobiography of Maurice Wilkins
, New York: Oxford University
Press.


Wimsatt, William, 1972, “Complexity and Organization”,
in Kenneth F. Schaffner and Robert S. Cohen (eds.), 
PSA 1972,
Proceedings of the Philosophy of Science Association
, Dordrecht:
Reidel, 67–86.


–––, 1976, “Reductive Explanation: A
Functional Account”, in A.C. Michalos, C.A. Hooker, G. Pearce,
and R.S. Cohen (eds.), 
Philosophy of Science Association
1974
, Dordrecht: Reidel, 671–710. Reprinted in Elliott
Sober (ed.), 1984, 
Conceptual Issues in Evolutionary Biology: An
Anthology
, First Edition. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press,
477–508.


–––, 1992, “Golden Generalities and
Co-opted Anomalies: Haldane vs. Muller and the 
Drosophila

Group on the Theory and Practice of Linkage Mapping”, in Sarkar
1992: 107–166.


–––, 1998, “Simple Systems and
Phylogenetic Diversity”, 
Philosophy of Science
, 65:
267–275.


Witkowski, Jan (ed.), 2005, 
The Inside Story: DNA to RNA to
Protein
, Woodbury, NY: Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press.


Woodward, James, 2002, “What Is a Mechanism? A
Counterfactual Account”, 
Philosophy of Science
, 69:
S336–S378.


–––, 2010, “Causation in Biology:
Stability, Specificity, and the Choice of Levels of
Explanation”, 
Biology and Philosophy
, 25:
287–318.


Würbel, Hanno, 2000, “Behaviour and the Standardization
Fallacy”, 
Nature Genetics
, 26: 263.


Yoshikawa, H., N. Ogasawara, and N. Satoh (eds.), 2002, 
Genome
Science: Towards a New Paradigm?
, Amsterdam: Elsevier


Zallen, Doris T., 1996, “Redrawing the Boundaries of
Molecular Biology: The Case of Photosynthesis”, in Sarkar 1996d:
47–65.


Zhang, Guojie, E.D. Jarvis, and M. Thomas P. Gilbert, 2014,
“A Flock of Genomes: Introduction to Special Issue”,

Science
, 346: 1308–1309.








Academic Tools










How to cite this entry
.








Preview the PDF version of this entry
 at the
 
Friends of the SEP Society
.








Look up topics and thinkers related to this entry

 at the Internet Philosophy Ontology Project (InPhO).








Enhanced bibliography for this entry

at 
PhilPapers
, with links to its database.












Other Internet Resources




Elof Carlson video interview

 (on Muller’s Research), 
DNA from the Beginning
.


Hershey-Chase Experiment

 (flash), The McGraw-Hill Companies.


Sanger Method of DNA Sequencing
,
 DNA Learning Center.


The Semi-Conservative Replication of DNA
,
 iBioMagazine.


The Southern Blot, Medical Research Council
,
 YouTube video on the discovery of the structure of DNA.








Related Entries




adaptationism
 |
 
biological development: theories of
 |
 
biology: experiment in
 |
 
biology: philosophy of
 |
 
causation: and manipulability
 |
 
cell biology, philosophy of
 |
 
chemistry, philosophy of
 |
 
developmental biology
 |
 
developmental biology: evolution and development
 |
 
Duhem, Pierre
 |
 
evolution
 |
 
feminist philosophy, interventions: philosophy of biology
 |
 
gene
 |
 
genetics
 |
 
genetics: molecular
 |
 
genomics and postgenomics
 |
 
heritability
 |
 
human genome project
 |
 
immunology, philosophy of
 |
 
information: biological
 |
 
inheritance systems
 |
 
laws of nature
 |
 
life
 |
 
mechanism in science
 |
 
models in science
 |
 
multiple realizability
 |
 
psychiatry, philosophy of
 |
 
reduction, scientific
 |
 
reduction, scientific: in biology
 |
 
replication and reproduction
 |
 
scientific discovery
 |
 
scientific explanation
 |
 
scientific method
 |
 
systems and synthetic biology, philosophy of










 






Copyright © 2024
 by



Tudor Baetu
<
Tudor-Mihai
.
Baetu
@
uqtr
.
ca
>


Monika Piotrowska

<
mpiotrowska
@
albany
.
edu
>


James Tabery






 









  Open access to the SEP is made possible by a world-wide funding initiative.

  Please Read How You Can Help Support the Growth and Development of the Encyclopedia




 

