











 
 Entry Navigation 






Entry Contents


Bibliography


Academic Tools


Friends PDF Preview 


Author and Citation Info 
 


Back to Top 


























Otto Neurath
First published Sun Aug 15, 2010; substantive revision Fri Mar 1, 2024









Source: 
Survey Graphic
, 25 (November 1936): 618.











Neurath was a social scientist and activist, scientific philosopher
and maverick leader of the Vienna Circle who championed the so-called
scientific attitude and the Unity of Science movement. He denied any
value to philosophy over and above the pursuit of work on science,
within science and for science and society. And scientific results, he
argued, are not logically fixed, securely founded on experience or can
be ordered in a System of knowledge. Uncertainty, decision and
cooperation are intrinsic to scientific practice. From this
naturalistic, holistic and pragmatist viewpoint, philosophy
investigates the conditions of the possibility of science as apparent
in science itself, namely, in terms of physical, biological,
sociological, historical, psychological, linguistic, logical or
mathematical conditions. His views on the language, method and unity
of science were led throughout by his interest in the social life of
individuals and their well-being. To theorize about society is
inseparable from theorizing for and within society. Science is in
every sense a social and historical enterprise and helps society
understand the past, explore possibilities and engineer the future. It
is as much about social objectives as it is about physical objects,
and about social realizations as much as about empirical reality.
Objectivity and rationality, epistemic values to constrain scientific
thought, were radically social. His contributions to visual education
–based on pictorial languages–, museology, urban planning,
and political economy –especially on collective welfare,
ecological economics and the unavoidability of multi-criterial
evaluation– constitute concrete legacies that have regained
relevance, interest and urgency. These are discussed in the
supplements,
 
Political Economy

 and
 
Visual Education
.








1. Biographical sketch


2. From economic theory to scientific epistemology


3. Neurath’s place in logical empiricism: physicalism, anti-foundationalism, holism, naturalism, externalism, pragmatism




3.1 Language


3.2 Language, logic and rationality


3.3 Scientific and linguistic epistemology






4. Unity of Science and the Encyclopedia Model


5. Philosophy of psychology, education, and the social sciences




5.1 Philosophy of psychology


5.2 Philosophy of education


5.3 Philosophy of the social sciences






Bibliography


Academic Tools


Other Internet Resources


Related Entries










1. Biographical sketch



Otto Neurath was born on 10 December 1882 in Vienna. He was the son of
Gertrud Kaempffert and Wilhelm Neurath, a Hungarian Jewish political
economist and social reformer. While benefitting from his
father’s vast polymathic library, in Vienna he studied
literature, mathematics, physics, history, philosophy and economics
(although he formally enrolled at the University of Vienna only for
two semesters in 1902–3). Next he followed the social scientist
Ferdinand Tönnies’s advice to move to Berlin, where he
received a doctoral degree in history of economics in 1906. He studied
under leaders of the so-called Young German Historical School Eduard
Meyer and Gustav Schmoller and he was awarded the degree for two
studies of economic history of antiquity, one on Cicero’s 
De
Officiis
 and the other with an emphasis on the non-monetary
economy of Egypt.



On his return to Vienna, he joined other economists such as Joseph
Schumpeter and Ludwig von Mises at postdoctoral seminars led by
theoriests of Carl Menger’s so-called Austrian School Eugen von
Böhm-Bawerk and Friedrich von Wieser. At the time Neurath engaged
ongoing debates over the unity of the sciences –especially the
distinction between Naturwissenschaften and
Geisteswisshenschaften–, the role of values in science and goals
and methods of economics (Uebel 2004). The debates would prompt early
views on the practice of science and inform his subsequent positions
within scientific philosophy and logical empiricism.



His first publications were in the history of political economy and
logic, a subject he had formally learned at the University of Vienna.
In the history of political economy, topics included the history of
money and economic organizations in antiquity, and his publications
included textbooks and readers either co-authored or co-edited with
his first wife Anna Schapire-Neurath, expert in literature and social
issues. The papers on logic focused on issues in algebraic logic and
included one paper, of 1909, co-authored with his friend and second
wife, Olga Hahn, a sister of the mathematician Hans Hahn (she shortly
after received a doctorate for her logic work). Neurath’s
subsequent theorizing on the social sciences and his contributions to
debates on logical empiricism integrated both disciplines. With the
mathematician Hans Hahn and the physicist Philip Frank, around 1910
Neurath formed in Vienna a philosophical discussion group focused on
foundational crises in physics and mathematics and the philosophical
ideas about science of Vienna’s positivist Ernst Mach and the
French conventionalists Pierre Duhem, Abel Rey and Henri
Poincaré. A great deal of philosophical and scientific concerns
and insight were already in place in Neurath’s thinking and
projects. With a grant from the Carnegie Endowment for International
Peace, a subsequent study of the Balkan Wars and then World War I led
him to develop a theory of war economy as a natural (non-monetary)
economy, or economy in kind, and to propose models for its peacetime
implementation as a solution to endemic socio-economic problems of
capitalism.



In 1919 the short-lived Bavarian socialist government (November
1918-April 1919) appointed him head of the Central Planning Office.
The fall of the subsequent Bavarian Soviet Republic in May 1919 got
him expelled from his junior post teaching economic theory under Max
Weber at Heidelberg University, where he had received his

Habilitation
 in 1917. His program for full socialization of
the economy was inspired by his studies of war economics and based on
his theory of natural economy and a holistic requirement to bring
different institutions and kinds of knowledge together in order to
understand, predict and control the complex phenomena of the social
world (see the supplementary material on
 
Political Economy
).
 His driving social concern was collective welfare or happiness, which
he came to consider not a form of utiltarianisn but of Epicurean
socialism.



From 1921 until 1934 Neurath participated actively in the development
of socialist politics, especially in housing and adult education, in
so-called Red Vienna (on his political life, see Sandner 2014). He
established the Social and Economic Museum of Vienna, where he
developed and applied the ‘Vienna method’ of picture
statistics and the ISOTYPE language (International System of
Typographic Picture Education) (see the supplementary document on
 
Visual Education
).
 Like the thought of other Viennese philosophers such as Ludwig
Wittgenstein and Karl Popper, Neurath’s philosophy was
inextricably linked to pedagogy, logic, critique of language and, in
Popper’s case, political thought. In 1928, with members of the
Austrian Freethinkers Association and the Vienna City Council and the
scientifically-trained members of the informal circle around the
current holder of Mach’s University Chair, the philosopher
Moritz Schlick (1924–29), Neurath helped found the 
Verein Ernst
Mach
, the Ernst Mach Association for the Promotion of Science
Education. The publication in 1929 of an intellectual manifesto gave
way to the formation of the Vienna Circle, whose narrower goal was the
articulation and promotion of a scientific world-conception and
logical empiricism (on the Viennese intellectual landscape, see
Stadler 2001).



When in 1934 the Austrian government allied itself with the German
Nazi government, Neurath fled to the Netherlands. As a result, his
local, Viennese, socialist Enlightenment project turned into an
internationalist, intellectual and social-political project. He
created the International Foundation for Visual Education in The
Hague, with his assistants from Vienna, and spearheaded the
International Unity of Science movement. The latter, inspired by a
tradition culminating in the Enlightenment’s French
Encyclopedists, launched the project of an Encyclopedia of Unified
Science. Together with the pictorial languages, the scientific
encyclopedia would promote scientific and social cooperation and
progress at an international level. After Austria became part of the
German Reich in 1938, even though living in the Netherlands, Neurath
was considered a German citizen and a ‘half-Jew’ and he
was not allowed to marry his ‘Aryan’ assistant Marie
Reidemeister—after his second wife, Olga, had died in 1937.
During this period, he travelled abroad, including the United States,
where logical empiricism had become entangled with the Cold War
political and intellectual debates and witch hunts (on the Cold War
phase, see Reich 2005). Carnap and Charles Morris at the University of
Chicago acted as his co-editors of the International Encyclopedia of
Unified Science. New York leftist intellectuals hosted him as an
intellectual and political ally. And his maternal first cousin
Waldemar Kaempffert, influential editor for 
The New York
Times
 and 
Popular Science
, introduced him as an
international reformer and visionary, praising his science-oriented
intellectual, social and educational ideas, especially his
contribution to unity of science and visual language (see Reisch
2019). After the Nazi invasion of the Netherlands in 1940, Otto
Neurath and Marie Reidemeister fled to England, on the small

Seaman’s Hope
. After nine months in an internment camp
they resumed activities related to the Isotype language, public
education and the unity of science. He died in Oxford on 22 December
1945 (on activities in the camp see Henning 2019; on activities after
see Körber 2019 and Tuboly 2019).


2. From economic theory to political and scientific epistemology



As mentioned above, by 1910 Neurath had already been involved in
debates on the issues of scientific unity and methodology. They were
prompted by his research in economics as well as foundational issues
in mathematics and physics and reading in positivism and
conventionalism. His early metascientific, or philosophical, views
developed along with his economic thinking and evolving historical
context. In projects of socialized, planned economic reform and in his
broader notion of economics, they featured interrelated concepts and
concerns: unity, rationality, precision, possibility, planning,
decision, control, construction –or engineering–,
communication, coordination, history and their social dimensions and
applications. The same issues –alongside illustrating references
to boats and Robinson Crusoe– would later play a defining role
in his epistemological and methodological contributions to logical
empiricism (Nemeth 1991, Cat 
et al
. 1991 and 1996 and Cat
2024).



For instance: (1) a notion of theorizing in natural and social
sciences, including history, based on the historical exploration of
combinatorial possibilities and models, past and future; (2) the
application in the social sciences of empirical goals and methods of
the natural sciences; (3) a unifying public (objective and testable)
language for scientific data and hypotheses, with a private-language
argument anticipating Wittgenstein’s own and also illustrated by
the case of Robinson Crusoe; (4) the evaluation and choice of data and
hypotheses characterized by a logical under-determination of
hypotheses by data and the conventional and pragmatic aspect of
rational decision-making and control (with a role for so-called
auxiliary motives); (5) the historical, social, cooperative, planned
and constructive (engineering) dimensions of scientific research (a
‘republic of scientists’); (6), connectedly, a holistic
approach to scientific knowledge and its application in the form of
encyclopedic unification without hierarchical systems as a tool for
successful prediction and engineering of events in a complex world
–an ‘encyclopedia model’, by establishing
cross-connections among disciplines, as in a Crusonian archipelago: a
‘great, rather badly coordinated mass of statements’ in
which at best ‘systems develop like little islands, which we
must try to enlarge’ (Neurath 1936/1983, 153)–; and (7)
the social relevance of scientific philosophy, especially the
unification and demarcation of science against metaphysics.



Regarding unification, Neurath endorsed a broader notion of economics
based on symbolic (or logical) rather than merely quantitative
precision and a historical perspective that included the use of
empirical methods and theoretical distinctions common in the natural
sciences; the combination served the purpose of comparing and
classifying past cases and future possibilities (Neurath 1910). In
addition, Neurath’s proposal of a moneyless war economy sought
to maximize human happiness rather than private profit, and was based
on a set of incommensurable indicators rather than the uniform
monetary measurement unit. An economic plan for a socialized economy
required the consideration of the different indicators that in turn
required a holistic organization of information and individuals to
coordinate decisions and action (rather than a market). Prediction and
action required different forms of unity.



This engineering value of unity applied equally to political
governance and scientific action, since both are collective and
pragmatic endeavors. According to Neurath, ‘scientific theories
are sociological events’ (Neurath 1932a/1983, 88), and, since
‘our thinking is a tool’, in this case the ‘modern
scientific world-conception’ aims to ‘create a unified
science that can successfully serve all transforming activity’
(Neurath 1930/1983, 42). In both cases, Neurath noted, ‘common
planned action is possible only if the participants make common
predictions’ and group predictions yield more reliable results;
therefore, he concluded, ‘common action presses us toward
unified science’ (Neurath 1931/1973, 407). Indeed, all along,
for Neurath scientific attitude and solidarity (and socialism) go
together (Neurath 1928/1973, 252).



Economic planning was a matter of consideration of possibilities and
making rational decisions. But for Neurath, practical and theoretical
rationality was not a matter of mechanical, objective calculation or
reasoning alone –especially in the absence of full insight and a
uniform quantitative monetary unit. In a study of psychology of
decisions he dismissed such a standard of rationality as
“pseudo-rationalism” (Neurath 1913). Planning was a
pragmatic (social) engineering problem, namely, a matter of
construction and control, and decisions among alternative
possibilities that required judgement, external goals or just a coin
flip –auxiliary motives (Neurath 1913). Both rationality and the
irreducibly social perspective were matters of debate among
economists, including Karl Marx, and illustrated, also by Neurath,
with references to the fictional figure of Robinson Crusoe stranded on
an island.



Along similar lines, we can place Neurath’s contributions to the
Vienna Circle’s project of a scientific world-conception and
logical empiricism in context of his evolving political epistemology.
Considerations of knowledge at the theoretical or practical service of
politics played a central role in his work on economic planning. He
envisioned the role of rationality and the coordination of information
and political goals mentioned above also in relation to socialist
democratic model of participation of citizen workers. Deliberation and
decision making required communication, also of social and economic
information. For such education purpose, at the service of
participation, Neurath designed a pictorial language (Sandner 2014,
Groß 2019 and Nemeth 2019; see also supplementary material on
visual education). This discursive approach to communication of
knowledge and decision making was also part of his objection and
alternative to models such as Hayek’s based on the role of
markets and prices (Hayek 1935, Neurath 1942). Neurath’s
economic planning was neither technocratic nor dictatorial (Chaloupek
2008). But it relied on expert proposals.



In exile in the 1940s the socialist internationalism of his social
models turned more liberal, combining international planning for
freedom and liberal democracy. Neurath addressed the role of experts
and the distinction between esoteric and exoteric, or lay, knowledge
and promoted the democratization of knowledge: ‘what we call
democracy implies a rejection of experts in making decision[s]’
(Neurath 1996, 251). But how much democratization required or could
achieve in such checks on expert power has been debated (Wussow
2021).



Neurath formulated his empiricist epistemology through the 1930s in
similar terms of checks and controls. Data statements he called
control statements; and the dynamics of knowledge formation and
revision was a matter of formal and empirical controls. Relative to
the resulting unity in a theory or body of knowledge, metaphysical
statements could be identified and rejected as uncontrolled and
isolated (Neurath 1931a, 48 and 1936a, 137).


3. Neurath’s place in logical empiricism: physicalism, anti-foundationalism, holism, naturalism, externalism, pragmatism


3.1 Language



Neurath’s later views on the language and method of science
expressed his simultaneous response to earlier problems in the social
sciences and to philosophical issues addressed by the Vienna Circle
between 1928 and 1934. A primary aim of the Vienna Circle was to
account for the objectivity and intelligibility of scientific method
and concepts and to demarcate scientific from metaphysical statements.
Their philosophical approach was to adopt what the Circle member
Gustav Bergmann called the linguistic turn, namely, to investigate the
formal or structural, logical and linguistic framework of scientific
knowledge. Within this framework members of the Circle pursued the
aims of intelligibility and demarcation by means of two connected
conditions of meaning and meaningfulness. The former
–stronger– often was formulated mainly by Moritz Schlick
(after Wittgenstein) as a condition of empirical verification. The
latter –weaker– was a related semantic condition of
empirical verifiability, formulated mainly by Rudolf Carnap in
different ways over time, and was supplemented by a syntactic
condition of formal or grammatical correctness (Uebel 2007). The
formal approach encompassed logicism and logical analysis as views
about the formation, interpretation, justification and acceptance
especially of theoretical statements. The problem of empiricism became
then the problem of coordination between the formal theoretical
structures and the records of observations in such a way that it also
offered an explication of how scientific knowledge can and should be
formally constructed (especially in logic and mathematics),
empirically grounded (except logic and mathematics), and thereby
understood, evaluated and accepted.



Sources of Neurath’s attention to language are multiple. Besides
Neurath’s own early interest in logic and classical and ancient
languages, the value of attention to language was familiar to Neurath
from the Austrian fin-de-siècle culture of critique of language
(Janik and Toulmin 1973), his interest (and his first wife’s) in
literature, especially in Goethe (Zemplen 2006), Marx and
Engels’ attention to the radically social dimension of language
(and its relation to money), the internationalist and utopianists
efforts at introducing new universal languages such as Volapük
and Esperanto, the emphasis on signs and universal languages –
to be known as pasigraphy – in the scholastic and rationalist
philosophical traditions, in the traditions of empirical taxonomies
and in the interest in universal language as instrument of knowledge
and social order in the Enlightenment, a semiotic tradition in
scientific epistemology including Helmholtz, Mach, Duhem and Peirce
(Cat 2019) and the sociologist Ferdinand Tönnies’s formal
approach to sociology and social signs (Tönnies 1899–1900
and Cartwright 
et al
. 1996). The significance of the
internationalist and philosophical projects of so-called pasigraphy
were acknowledged also by Carnap. More “scientific”
sources were recent technical developments in logic, philosophy of
science and the foundation of mathematics often claiming Leibniz as a
precursor (Leibniz’s logic and project of a universal
characteristic had become widely recognized by the late nineteenth
century (Peckhaus 2012)). Leading figures in such developments were
Frege, Hilbert, Whitehead, Russell and Wittgenstein.



Russell led the application of the new method of analytic philosophy
that required solving or dissolving philosophical problems by
analyzing their formulation in a more perspicuous technical, logical
language. His student Wittgenstein, in turn, introduced a linguistic
philosophy that limited the world to the scope of the application of
an ideal symbolic languages, or calculus. As a result, the sole task
of philosophy was, according to Wittgenstein, the critique of language
in the form of an activity of clarification, without yielding a
distinctive philosophical body of knowledge or set of
propositions.



Looking to the rationalist traditions of Descartes and Leibniz, Jean
van Heijenoort and Jaakko Hintikka have distinguished between two
views of language that are relevant to the new linguistic turn
(Mormann 1999): language as calculus (LC) and language as universal
medium (LUM). The LC tradition, illustrated by Tarski’s views,
aligned itself with the Cartesian ideal of a transparent language,
with clear and distinctive meaning and explicit, mechanical
combination and rule-following that extended to its use in reasoning.
There are many possible constructed languages and each is an
interpreted calculus with different possible semantics. The LUM
tradition adopted the idea of a single actual or ideal language and
one semantic or interpretation, to be elucidated, with no possibility
of representing its relation to the world from outside. Views by
Frege, who pointed to Leibniz on language and reasoning, and
Wittgenstein illustrate this tradition, which in turn accommodates two
versions, a Cartesian one (Frege and Russell) and a non-Cartesian one
(Wittgenstein).



Members of the Vienna Circle pursued their shared philosophical goals
through the discussion of language and its application in cognition.
Their respective views on epistemic matters relied on different views
on language and philosophy. Carnap and Neurath shared an
epistemological naturalism –without a priori foundations–
with a constructive metascientific standpoint; philosophy would
require a scientific metatheory within the boundaries of unified
science (Uebel 2007 and Bentley 2023). The difference rested in the
goals and scientific disciplines they favored. Carnap looked to formal
tools such as logic and syntax and sought rational reconstruction;
Neurath looked to the empirical sciences, from psychology to history
and sociology and sought pragmatic guidance to provide and improve
scientists’ tools and decisions –and social
applications.



Carnap’s conversion to semantics in the early 1930s took him to
the LC Cartesian tradition seeking a universal language of rational
reconstruction he had previously recognized in the language of
physics. Neurath, by contrast, modeled his anti-metaphysical
unification of the sciences in the LUM tradition, on a public
–empirically testable and socially effective– universal
mixed language he eventually called a ‘universal jargon’,
with descriptions of spatio-temporal arrangements and connections he
called physicalism, historically contingent use of vague and ordinary
terms (see below). In this context Neurath adopted a militant
syntacticism, avoiding semantic entities and properties such as
truth-values, reference and correspondence. He unsurprisingly opposed
and denounced Carnap’s defense of semantics and Schlick’s
talk of reality as metaphysical (Anderson 2019) –engaging along
the way in heated terminological disputes that ignored Carnap’s
commitment to ontological neutrality (Carus 2019).



Again, the Circle’s projects shared the aforementioned focus on
language and experience. The linguistic approach was adopted as a
philosophical tool in order to explicate the rationality and the
objectivity—that is, inter-subjectivity—and
communicability of thought. Lacking the transcendental dimension of
Kant’s metaphysical apparatus, attention to language extended to
non-scientific cases such as ‘ordinary language
philosophy’ in Oxford. In the context of logical empiricism, the
formal dimension of knowledge was thought to be manifest particularly
in the exactness of scientific statements.



For Schlick, knowledge proper, whether of experience or transcendent
reality, was such only by virtue of form or
structure—‘only structure is knowable’. For Carnap,
in addition, the formal dimension possessed distinct methodological
values: it served the purpose of logical analysis and rational
reconstruction of knowledge and helped expose and circumvent
‘pseudo-philosophical’ problems around metaphysical
questions about reality (his objections to Heidegger appealed to
failures of proper logical formulation and not just empirical
verification). In 1934 he proposed as the task of philosophy the
metalinguistic analysis of logical and linguistic features of
scientific method and knowledge (the ‘thesis of
metalogic’). For Neurath, this approach helped purge philosophy
of deleterious metaphysical nonsense and dogmatism, and acknowledged
the radically social nature of language and science. His approach to
demarcation through significance or meaningfulness was pragmatic and
looser than that of fellow Circle members. His approach to
verification, or empirical control, and formal control of knowledge
claims was contextual, pragmatic and holistic. He defended a
corresponding distinction between controlled, integrated statements
(unification) and uncontrolled, isolated metaphysical ones –or
of some other kind. But this required a uniform language for
scientific collaboration that he thought contained unavoidable vague
terms and required uniform notational standards, even in logic.



Neurath’s plan was for a unified science against metaphysics,
and this involved a plan to police the proper unifying,
metaphysics-free language. The negative track of the plan was
effectively carried out by the development and adoption of a list of
‘dangerous terms,’ which he sometimes referred to,
semi-jokingly, as an 
index verborum prohibitorum
: a list of
forbidden terms such as ‘I’, ‘ego’,
‘substance,’ etc. (Neurath 1933, Neurath 1940/1984, 217).
The positive track was the adoption of the universal language of
physicalism: ‘
metaphysical terms
divide
—
scientific terms unite
’ (1935, 23,
orig. ital.).


3.2 Language, logic and rationality



Logic has long received philosophical attention as a language
regulated by strict rules of reasoning, thus setting standards of
clarity, rigor and rationality. Leibniz had given modern philosophical
currency to the pasigraphic notion of a universal characteristic or
Alphabet of Thought that both expressed reality and operated as a
logical calculus of reasoning. In the Cartesian spirit, language and
reason were inseparable instruments of knowledge and mathematical,
logical and philosophical methods were identical. In the late
nineteenth century and the early twentieth, Leibniz’s project
became a common reference in works in mathematical logic. Not only did
Frege see his philosophy of language and mathematical logic within
this tradition, as did Peano; Russell penned a landmark study and
logicians such as Ernst Schröder and Louis Couturat associated it
distinctively with the development of algebraic logic since Boole,
especially with Schröder’s own (Peckhaus 2012).



Neurath enjoyed early attention and recognition for his logic work
also reflected in early reminiscences of figures such as Popper and
the mathematician Karl Menger. Perhaps surprisingly now, mentions of
Neurath’s and Olga Hahn’s papers were included by the
logicians C.I. Lewis, in 1918, and Alonzo Church, in 1936, in their
canonical bibliographies on symbolic logic (Lewis 1918 and Church
1936). Neurath kept algebraic logic and its symbolic dimension as a
recurrent standard and resource, first in his earlier work on the
social sciences and pictorial language, and subsequently in related
contributions to the discussions that informed logical empiricism.



Contrary to predominant accounts using attention to formal languages
and logic to pit against each other wings and members of the logical
empiricist movement, the symbolic logical standard may be considered a
unifying framework for scientific philosophy that distinguished
Neurath within it and not from it. It a unifying reference he
willingly adopted when he coined the term ’logical
empiricism.’ The differentiating role in Neurath’s
positions can be identified in his shifting and progressively
skeptical and critical attention to the standard and to his attention
to algebraic logic rather than the newer logic familiar to Carnap from
Frege’s and Russell’s works on logic and logicism.



By the late nineteenth century, in Austria as well as Germany,
algebraic logic had found a central place in the raging controversies
over the relationship between science and philosophy and, in
particular, between mathematics, logic and psychology. Neurath and
Olga Hahn became acquainted with algebraic logic at the University of
Vienna sometime around 1902–3, but it wasn’t until 1909, after
Olga had become blind and Neurath was back in Vienna providing
assistance, that she started working on algebraic logic for her
doctorate in philosophy and they began their collaboration and
separate publications. Neurath published four papers, one with Hahn
(Neurath 1909a, 1909b and 1910a, and Hahn and Neurath 1909). Hahn
separately published two others, the second submitted as her doctoral
thesis (Hahn 1909 and 1910).



Neurath’s logic writings focused on Schröder’s
axiomatic systematization of algebraic logic, mainly in the monumental

Vorlesungen über die Algebra der Logik (exakte Logik)

(1890–95). There and in earlier writings, Schröder gave a
fundamental role to the relation of subsumption and a law of duality.
Subsumption was a part-whole relation defined over domains of objects.
The law of duality established a systematic correspondence between
theorems in terms of 1 and operation + and theorems in terms of 0 and
operation x.



The papers were concerned with the equality relations and fundamental
status of axioms of the system of algebraic logic, dominant in the
second half of the nineteenth century and modeled, they objected, too
closely after mathematical operations and equations. It was developed
as a calculus of statements (propositional logic) and domains, more
generally. Neurath distinguished between expression and denotation of
signs to distinguish different uses and interpretations of equality
signs and interpret symbolic identities as univocal relations and
redundant expressions and rules of substitution in the logical
manipulation of signs. In particular, he distinguished between
definitional equality, symbolic equality and identity equality. Most
of the papers focused on the case of the property of commutativity
(‘ab=ba’) and Schröder’s proof. Neurath
rejected the proof as based on unjustified mathematical notational
assumptions. In particular, the symbolic equality between symbols for
the same relation between the same objects renders one symbol
meaningless, or redundant. The commutativity result is merely a
symbolic equality, a notational stipulation.



In their joint paper, Hahn and Neurath also focused on the principle
of duality as a basic symmetry principle for the generation of
theorems for complementary domains and operations. They argued that
duality is linked to the fundamental symmetric complementarity between
positive and negative domains. It is a (meta)logical, not an
empirical, inductive principle; so understood it could be applied more
clearly and systematically. Neurath and Hahn’s attention to the
relativity of fundamental logical axioms and symbolic notation
paralleled similar conventionalist discussions in geometry, especially
by Poincaré.



Rational decision-making became a central issue in Neurath’s
economic thinking. All the more so when Neurath noted the limitations
of the calculation of collective comparative pleasure and displeasure
associated with different sets of goods (Neurath 1912). It is hardly
surprising then that, even before engaging in debates over the
rationality of socialist economic planning, Neurath continued
examining reasoning and rationality –theoretical and
practical– more generally. In Vienna, the intellectual and
social project was connected to the spirit of the Enlightenment. In an
essay of 1913, ‘The lost wanderers of Descartes and the
auxiliary motive (on the psychology of decision)’ (Neurath 1913)
he criticized Descartes’ theoretical rationalism and examined
his psychology of action to explore decision-making under uncertainty.
He introduced a general distinction, for theoretical and practical
reasoning, between rationality and pseudo-rationalism. He dismissed as
pseudorationalism the ideal of replacing instinct and authority with
formal reasoning and calculation as the sole and sufficient method of
decision-making based on conclusions without awareness of cognitive
limitations or incomplete insight.



Instead, he argued, conclusions about courses of action, including the
acceptance of hypotheses, are typically in need of supplementing with
additional considerations he called auxiliary motives. The recourse is
justified pragmatically. In general, what counts as an auxiliary
motive might be external motives, values or conventions (goals or
constraints as reasons) and pure decision procedures including the
drawing of lots –since making any decision is more important
than any decision made– (on the pure proceduralist
interpretation see Bentley 2023). This volutntarism, decisionism and
pragmatism became central to his contributions to the scientific
epistemology of logical empiricism. He referred then also to
unavoidable extra-logical factors (Neurath 1934).


3.3 Scientific and linguistic epistemology



Kant had delivered the latest grand attempt to address the relation
between science and philosophy, by taking the former to provide
objective empirical knowledge (exact, universal and necessary) and
giving to the latter knowledge the task of laying out the a priori
conditions of intelligibility and possibility of such knowledge as the
sole, critical scope of metaphysics and legitimate exercise of reason.
Kant’s standard of a priori, an expression of rationality, was
challenged and relativized by Frege, Russell and Whitehead’s
notions of mathematical numbers grounded in logic, by models of
non-Euclidean geometry and their analysis by Poincaré and by
the new notions of space and time in Einstein’s relativity
theories. Neither mathematics was synthetic nor physics seemed a
priori; as a result, in the new scientific landscape the metaphysical
category of synthetic a priori was dismissed as empty of content.



With the scientific world-conception, logical empiricists followed in
the footsteps and Helmholtz and Mach and considered a new post-Kantian
problematic: investigating the possibility of objective empirical
knowledge with a role for intellectual construction without
universality or necessity, neither Kantian apriorism nor radical
positivism. Logic, with scientific status linked to technical
symbolism and the possibility of mathematics, was the sole last refuge
for philosophy. The new problematic suggested a demarcation project
with two inseparable tasks that were both descriptive and normative: a
positive, unifying task to establish and promote the marks of
scientific knowledge and the negative task to distinguish it from
philosophy, especially the objects and concepts of metaphysics.



According to logical empiricists a priori knowledge claims expressed
in exact theory were circumscribed to the analytic. Yet they were
voided of universality and necessity (Kant’s marks of the a
priori) and deflated by Schlick and Reichenbach to the character of
definitions and conventions (following Poincaré). They were
true or valid only relatively and by construction. Synthetic knowledge
claims were exclusively a posteriori, their contents and validity
grounded in experience.



The philosophical discussion that developed around the members of the
Vienna Circle was associated with the formulation of logical
empiricism and the rallying cry of ‘unity of science against
metaphysics.’But it cannot be adequately understood without
taking into account the diversity of evolving projects it
accommodated. Carnap’s and Neurath’s respective
metascientific stance has been mentioned above. Carnap was much
borrowed from the neo-Kantian tradition, Einstein’s theories of
relativity, Husserl’s phenomenology, Frege’s logic and,
i.e., Hilbertian axiomatic approach to mathematics as well as
Russell’s own logicism and his philosophical project of logical
constructions. He was concerned with the conditions of the possibility
of objective knowledge, which he considered especially manifest in the
formal exactness of scientific claims (Carnap 1928). Schlick borrowed
from turn-of-the-century French conventionalists such as Rey, Duhem
and Poincaré, Wittgenstein’s philosophy of representation
of facts, as well as Einstein’s relativity theories and
Hilbert’s implicit definitions and axiomatic approach to
mathematics. He was interested in the meaning of terms in which actual
scientific knowledge of reality is expressed, as well as its
foundation on true and certain beliefs about reality (Schlick 1918,
1934). Also Reichenbach had been influenced by and borrowed from
Einstein, neo-Kantianism and Hilbert’s axiomatics. Neurath
borrowed, among others, fromm Mach, varieties of French
conventionalism, especially Duhem’s, and varieties of social
thought including Marxism. He sought to explore the empirical and
historical conditions of scientific practice in both the natural and
social sciences (Neurath 1931/1973, 1932a/1983). Outside the Vienna
Circle, Popper borrowed from Hume, Kant and Austrian child psychology.
He was interested in addressing the logical and normative issues of
justification and demarcation of objective and empirical scientific
knowledge, without relying on descriptive discussions of the
psychology of subjective experience and meaning (Popper
1935/1951).



The linguistic turn framed the examination of the controversial role
of experience and the form of its expression and relation to
hypotheses. In that respect an ensuing discussions of data or
so-called protocol sentences concerned their linguistic
characteristics and their epistemological status (Uebel 1992). It
served the Circle’s purpose of ascertaining the source,
evaluation and acceptance of human knowledge and rejecting metaphysics
as nonsense—often dangerous nonsense (Carnap, Hahn and Neurath
1929/1973, and Stadler 2007).



Neurath’s departing position was a critique of Carnap. In his
classic work 
Der Logische Aufbau der Welt
 (1928) (known as
the 
Aufbau
 and translated as 
The Logical Structure of the
World
), Carnap investigated the logical
‘construction’ (Russell’s term) of objects/concepts
of inter-subjective knowledge out of the simplest starting point or
basic types. To reconstruct empirical knowledge, Carnap explored an
empiricist, or phenomenological, model in terms of the immediate
experiential basis was quickly understood by fellow members of the
Vienna Circle as manifesting three philosophical positions that
structured the debate: 
reductionism
, 
atomism
 and

foundationalism
.




Reductionism
 took one set of terms to be fundamental or
primitive; the rest would be logically connected to them.




Atomism
, especially in Neurath’s reading, was manifest
semantically and syntactically: semantically, in the analyzability of
a term; syntactically or structurally, in the elementary structure of
protocols in terms of a single experiential term—‘red
circle here now.’ It appeared further in the possibility of an
individual testing relation of a theoretical statement to one of more
experiential statements.




Foundationalism
, in the Cartesian tradition of a secure
basis, took the beliefs in these terms held by the subject to be
infallible, or not requiring verification, and the sole empirical
source of epistemic warrant—or credibility—for all other
beliefs. Descartes’s foundationalism is based on 
a
priori
 knowledge; Carnap’s presentation of the empirical
basis constitutes a more modest, naturalistic version (see also his
1932/1987).



Neurath first confronted Carnap on yet another alleged feature of his
system, namely, subjectivism. On this issue dovetailed Carnaps’
Kantian problematic of explicating the objectivity of empirical
knowledge and Neurath’s materialism and social –and
socialist– perspective on economic, political and epistemic
matters. Neurath rejected Carnap’s proposals on the grounds that
if the language and the system of statements that constitute
scientific knowledge are intersubjective, then phenomenalist talk of
immediate subjective, private experiences should have no place. More
generally, Neurath offered a private language argument, featuring
Robinson Crusoe, to the effect that languages are necessarily
intersubjective:



The universal jargon…is the same for the child and for the
adult. It is the same for a Robinson Crusoe as for a human society. If
Robinson wants to join what is in a protocol of yesterday with what is
in his protocol today, that is, if he wants to make use of language at
all, he must make use of the ‘intersubjective’ language.
The Robinson of yesterday and the Robinson of today stand precisely in
the same relation in which Robinson stands to Friday…In other
words, every language as such is intersubjective. (Neurath 1932b/1983,
96)




To replace Carnap’s phenomenalist language Neurath introduced in
1931 the language of physicalism (Neurath 1931/1983 and 1932a/1983).
Physicalism is, for Neurath, the view that the unity, intelligibility
and objectivity of science rest on using statements in a language of
public things, events and processes in space and time —including
behavior and physiological events, hence not necessarily in the
technical terms of physical theory. Carnap promptly adopted a more
technical version of physicalism requiring translatability of
protocols to the language of physics (Carnap 1932/1934). While
inspired by anti-metaphysical materialism, for Neurath this was a
methodological and linguistic rule, and not an ontological thesis. The
syntacticism mentioned above concerns the emphasis on spatio-temporal
order or patterns. Neurath’s view could claim that language was
itself was a physical process and could express its own
spatio-temporal structure. This was also in line with his typographic
concerns in logic and visual communication.



That physicalism was to avoid metaphysical connotations can be seen
further in that its linguistic nature was also central to its
applications. Neurath insisted that statements can be compared only
with statements, certainly not with some “reality”, nor
with “things,” (Neurath 1931/1983, 53). Knowledge was a
social matter of empirical control.



Neurath responded with a new doctrine of protocol statements that
considered their distinctive linguistic form, contents and
methodological status (Neurath 1932b/1983). This doctrine was meant to
explicate the idea of scientific evidence in the framework of
empiricism, and it did so by specifying public conditions of
evaluation and acceptance of a statement as empirical scientific
evidence. In particular, Neurath intended the physicalist doctrine of
protocol statements to circumvent the pitfalls of subjectivism,
atomism, reductionism and foundationalism attributed to Carnap’s
earlier discussion. It supported, instead, a holistic,
anti-foundationalist, decisionistic, pragmatist, social view
characterizing the scientific, empiricist attitude.



One informal but paradigmatic example of a protocol was:



Otto’s protocol at 3:17 o’clock: [Otto’s
speech-thinking at 3:16 was: (at 3:15 o’clock there was a table
in the room perceived by Otto)].




Neurath offered examples over time featuring different numbers of
parts, between two and four (on the debate around this issue, see
Uebel 2007). Far from Carnap’s atomic sort of protocol
statements, Neurath’s model manifested a distinctive complexity
of terms and structure. The protocol contains a factual physicalist
core in terms about the table and its location. It also contains the
experiential term that provides the linguistic recording of the
empirical character of protocols, that is, their experiential origin.
Neurath was mindful to caution here that perception terms only
admitted physicalistic meaning in terms, for instance, of behavior or
physiological mechanisms of perception. It also contains the
declarative level, marked with ‘Otto says’, which
distinguishes the protocol as a linguistic statement. Finally, the
other distinctive elements were the name of the protocolist and the
times and locations of the experience and the reports, which provided
an intersubjective, physicalist, public alternative to Carnap’s
first-person, subjective ‘
I
 see a red circle

here
 
now
’.



Unlike Carnap’s ideal of basic statement, whether protocol or
physicalist, Neurath’s protocols were not ‘clean’,
precise or pure in their terms. For Neurath physicalist language, and
hence science in turn, is inseparable from ordinary language of any
time and place. In particular, it is muddled with imprecise,
unanalyzed, cluster-like terms (
Ballungen
) that appear
especially in the protocols: the name of the protocolist,
‘seeing’, ‘microscope’, etc. They were often
to be further analyzed into more precise terms or mathematical
co-ordinations, but they often would not be eliminated. Even the
empirical character of protocol statements could not be pure and
primitive, as physicalism allowed the introduction of
theoretical—non-perception—terms. Physicalism, and thus
unified science, were based on a universal ‘jargon’.



Neurath’s protocols didn’t have the atomic structure and
the atomic testing role of Carnap’s. Their methodological role
reflected Duhem’s 
holism
: hypotheses are not tested
individually; only clusters of statements confront empirical data. But
their methodological value in the testing of other statements
didn’t make them unrevisable. This is Neurath’s

anti-foundationalism
: Insofar as they were genuinely
scientific statements, consistency with the spirit that opposed
science to dogmatic speculation and, no less importantly, opposed
naturalistic attention to actual practice, required that protocols too
be testable. Physicalism challenges the epistemic authority of
first-person private experience and enables the democratic
socialization of empirical claims in the networks of scientific
statements and collaborations.



From this follows the so-called 
Neurath Principle
: in the
face of conflict between a protocol and theoretical statements, the
cancellation of a protocol statement is a methodological possibility
as well (Neurath 1932b/1983, Haller 1982). The role of indeterminacy
in the protocol language points to a distinction between a 
special
Neurath Principle
 and a 
general Neurath Principle

(Cartwright 
et al
. 1996, Cat 1995). In the former, and
earlier, Neurath assumed a determinate logical relation of
inconsistency. In the latter, subsequent version, the scope of
relations between hypotheses and protocol statements extended to
indeterminate relations such that the principle behind the epistemic
status of protocol statements is simply grounded on the voluntaristic
and conventionalist doctrine that ‘[a]ll content statements of
science, and also their protocol statements that are used for
verification, are selected on the basis of decisions and can be
altered in principle’ (Neurath 1934/1983, 102).



The complex structure of the explicitly laid out protocol would
provide an explication and synoptic visual tool for differentiating
and integrating explicitly relevant testing conditions: the
intersubjective conditions of evaluation and acceptance of the record
and its core data, or record of core factual information to enter the
relevant scientific field of empirical research. The different
conditions could guide the control of relevant data by laying out the
conditions of their origin, validity and fallibility (was Otto
hallucinating? were all the parts of the experimental instrument
working reliably? etc.).



Neurath’s dictum was meant to do justice to actual scientific
practice and its normative standards with regards to the role of
experimental data. It is up to the members of the scientific community
to decide when a protocol can support or challenge a hypothesis, at
last provisionally. Invalid protocols may change their status or be
repurposed as data for historical or social studies of science (Uebel
2007 and Bentley 2023). What distinguishes the epistemic status of
protocol sentences is not their foundational certainty (unlike for
Schlick), but their stability as available and acceptable records over
time and across projects and purposes. In this way they facilitate
communication, cooperation and empirical inquiry.



The method of testing failed to meet a certain standard and
expectation of rationality: It could not be carried out in a logically
precise, determinate and conclusive manner. expecting calculability,
determinism, omniscience and certainty (Neurath 1913/1983, Neurath
1934/1983 and Cat 1995). By virtue of perception terms, protocol
sentences could in fact provide certain stability in the permanence of
information necessary for the generation of new expressions. But
methodologically they could only bolster or shake our confidence. To
acknowledge these limitations is a mark of proper
rationality—which he opposed to 
pseudorationality
.



A loose coherentist view of warrant, acceptance and unification is the
only logical criterion available: ‘a statement is called correct
if it can be incorporated in this totality’ of ‘existing
statements that have already been harmonized with each other’
(Neurath 1931/1984, 66). Reasons underdetermine our actions and thus
pragmatic extra-logical factors are required to make decisions about
what hypotheses to accept. Thinking requires provisional rules, or
auxiliary motives, that fix a conclusion by decision (Neurath
1913/1983).



Scientific rationality is situated, contextually constrained by,
practical rationality. The construction of knowledge is constrained by
historically, socially, methodologically and theoretically accepted
claims and standards –as well as other possible factors he
called extra-logical. They bear limited stability, and cannot be
rebuilt on pure, secure, infallible empirical foundations. This is the
anti-Cartesian naturalism, non-foundationalism, fallibilism and holism
of Neurath’s social model. This is also the basis for its
corresponding decisonistic, conventionalist, constructivist
normativity (Uebel 1996 and 2007 and Cartwright 
et al
. 1996).
Without the norms and conventions self-issued within a community,
there is no possibility of rationality or objectivity of knowledge.
Neurath captured the main features of his doctrine of scientific
knowledge in the image of a boat:



There is no way to establish fully secured, neat protocol statements
as starting points of the sciences. There is no 
tabula rasa
.
We are like sailors who have to rebuild their ship on the open sea,
without ever being able to dismantle it in dry-dock and reconstruct it
from its best components. Only metaphysics can disappear without a
trace. Imprecise ‘verbal clusters’ [
Ballungen
]
are somehow always part of the ship. If imprecision is diminished at
one place, it may well re-appear at another place to a stronger
degree. (Neurath 1932b/1983, 92)




Just like Neurath debated Carnap, he also entered an acrimonious
debate with Popper and Schlick. By 1934, the year of the completion of
his 
Logic of Scientific Discovery
 (
Logik der
Forschung
), Popper had adopted an approach to scientific
knowledge based on the logic of method, not on meaning, so that any
talk of individual experience would have no linguistic expression
(Popper 1935/1951). He was concerned with the post-Kantian problematic
of the rational objective validity of scientific knowledge claims.



Instead of protocols, Popper proposed to speak about basic
statements—a term more attuned to their logical and functional
role. They are basic relative to a theory under test. Their empirical
character would invisibly reside in the requirement that basic
statements be singular existential ones describing material objects in
space and time—much like Neurath’s physicalism—which
would be observable, in a further unspecified logical not
psychological sense. Their components would not themselves be purely
empirical terms since many would be understood in terms of
dispositional properties, which, in turn, involved reference to
law-like generalizations. But their ‘basic’ role was
methodological ‘with no direct function of demarcation from
metaphysics in terms of meaning, sense or cognitive
significance’ and only provisional. They would be brought to
methodological use for the purpose of falsifying theories and
hypotheses ‘individually and conclusively’ only once they
were conventionally and communally accepted by decision in order to
stop infinite regress and further theoretical research.



But such acceptance, much as in Neurath’s model, could be in
principle revoked. It is a contingent fact that scientists will stop
at easily testable statements simply because it will be easier to
reach an agreement. It is important that basic statements satisfy
explicit conditions of testability or else they could not be rightful
part of science. Popper could offer no rational theory of their
acceptance on pain of having to have recourse to theories of
psychology of perception and thereby weakening his normative criterion
of demarcation. In his view, his method, unlike Neurath’s,
didn’t lead to either arbitrariness or dogmatism or the
abandonment of empiricism. As he had argued against Spengler in 1921,
historical contingency provides the rich constraints that establish
communities and communication and the possibility of knowledge and, in
this holistic form, preclude radical relativism in practice; in
historically situated practice, inherited or constructed stable
Archimedean points always come into place; there is no 
tabula
rasa
 (Neurath 1921/1973). Neurath rejected Popper’s
approach for its stealth empiricism and its pseudorationalism: its
misplaced emphasis on and faith in the normative uniqueness, precision
and conclusiveness of a logical method—at the expense of its own
limitations and pragmatic character (Zolo 1989, Cat 1995, Hacohen
2000).



Finally, the most radical empiricist attitude toward protocol
sentences within the Vienna Circle came from Schlick. Schlick
endorsed, following Hilbert, a formal, structural notion of
communicable, objective knowledge and meaning as well as a
correspondence theory of truth. His realism opposed Neurath’s
coherentism, and also the pragmatism and conventionalism of
Carnap’s 
Principle of Tolerance
 in logical matters, as
well as his Thesis of Metalogic. But like Carnap’s latter thesis
and his syntactic approach of 1934, Schlick was concerned with both
the Cartesian ideal of foundational certainty and Wittgenstein’s
metalinguistic problem of how language represents the reality it is
about; such relation could only be shown, not said. In 1934 Schlick
proposed to treat the claims motivating protocol statements, left by
Neurath with the status of little more than mere hypotheses, as key to
the foundation of knowledge. They would be physicalistic statements
that, albeit being fallible, could be subjectively linked to
statements about immediate private experiences of reality such as
‘blue here now’ he called affirmations
(
Konstatierungen
) (Schlick 1934).



Affirmations carried certainty and elucidated what could be showed but
not said, they provided the elusive confrontation or correspondence
between theoretical propositions and facts of reality. In this sense
they afforded, according to Schlick, the fixed starting points and
foundation of all knowledge. But the foundation raised a psychological
and semantic problem about the longer-term acceptance of a protocol.
Affirmations, as acts of verification or giving meaning, lacked
logical inferential force; in Schlick’s words, they ‘do
not occur within science itself, and can neither be derived from
scientific propositions, nor the latter from them’ (Schlick
1934, 95). Schlick’s empiricism regarding the role of protocol
sentences suggests but does not support strong epistemological
foundationalism. Schlick’s occasional references to a
correspondence theory of truth were just as unacceptable and were felt
to be even more of a philosophical betrayal within the framework of
empiricism. Predictably, Neurath rejected Schlick’s doctrines as
metaphysical, manifesting the pseudorationalist attitude (Neurath
1934/1983).


4. Unity of Science and the Encyclopedia Model



Neurath’s concern with unity in the sciences has multiple
sources and served different kinds of purposes; his proposals also had
different forms and played different roles. In the contect of logical
empiricism we may identify at least five: prediction, acceptance,
cooperation, demarcation and metascience (or scientific
philosophy).



Early in his intellectual life, at the turn of the twentieth century,
Neurath was acquainted with at least four recent images and projects
of unification of the sciences: (1) The scholastic (Llull) and
rationalist (Leibniz) tradition of an ideal universal language and
calculus of reasoning; (2) the Neo-Kantians and others’ emphasis
on the distinction between the 
Naturwissenschaften
 and the

Geisteswissenschaften
; (3) Wundt’s comprehensive
logical viewpoints associated with different sciences, or perspectival
monism; and (4) the Monist movement more generally, with figures such
as Ernst Haeckel and Wilhelm Ostwald that included the project of
energetics, with Mach’s related bio-economic, neutral monism of
elementary sensations.



By 1910, Neurath had engaged four connected debates: (1) The debate
over the Neo-Kantian divide between natural and human, or cultural,
sciences; (2) the debate over the distinctive role of value judgment
in the social sciences; (3) the debate over the scope and validity of
concepts, laws and methods in economics; and (4) the debate over the
possibility of history as a positive science.



In the face of alternatives, he often sought synthetic positions,
e.g., integrating the application of empirical inductive methods and
theoretical deductive methods in the social sciences by the empirical
standards of the natural sciences and within a historical perspective
that explored and classified possible cases, past, present and future.
In his programmatic theory of the social sciences of 1910 –a
review of Wundt’s theory of the sciences– he declared:
‘True science consists in systematically examining all possible
cases.’ (Neurath 2004, 278)



He also argued for unity within a science and unity of the different
individual sciences. He called it cooperative division of labor
instead of specialized separation of labor (Neurath 2004, 265–288).
The former is guided by general perspectives providing connecting
links between individual sciences (he cited Llull and Leibniz as early
relevant examples of the project of universal knowledge). Those links
operate as auxiliary hypotheses and a better sense for what might be
accepted and rejected –echoing and extending Duhem’s
holistic methodological model of testing. Cooperation between
generalist and specialized research, he declared, will supplement and
correct each other; and collaborative efforts towards seeking
connections from all specialized work will bring to specialized
components significance in organization rather than chaos (Neurath
2004, 287).



Unity became central to the Vienna Circle’s project. And Neurath
made sure of it. In the Vienna Circle’s manifesto (Carnap et
al., 1929) and elsewhere, Neurath urged and welcomed a scientistic
turn in philosophy he labelled the scientific world-conception. Beyond
the intellectual value, he added, ‘
the scientific
world-conception serves life and life receives it
’ (Carnap,
Hahn and Neurath 1929/1973, 306, orig. ital.). Here the project of
logical empiricism gets its Viennese Enlightenment dimension, with the
old reforming, constructive and universalist ambitions, but with new
and revised ideas and ideals of society, science and rationality
(Uebel 1998). Neurath continued to maintain the view that, as
predictive tools, all sciences are ‘aids to creative life’
(Neurath 1931/1973, 319), alongside his view of the complexity of
life, e.g., the earthly plane of the empirical world that includes the
human. It cannot surprise, then, that in this new transformative joint
philosophical-social project he would urge that ‘the goal ahead
is 
unified science
’ (Carnap et al. 1929/1973, 306,
orig. ital.). Like science itself, unified science straddles any
divide between theory and action, the world of physical objects and
the world of social objectives, past and future, empirical reality and
human realization. It is unity of science at the point of action
(Cartwright et al 1991, Cartwright 
et al
. 1996 and
O’Neill 2003). Not just philosophy; also science at the point of
action is unified science.



The goal of science –and the key to its practical
application–, he repeated, was empirical prediction. The focus
on language placed unity of language at the center of unification.
Physicalism and its universal jargon were, as mentioned above,
precisely the key to achieving the social and intellectual goals of
the scientific world-conception and logical empiricism. Physicalism
also provided a unification of the natural and human sciences.



In addition, and based on an available connecting language for the
sciences, Neurath introduced the holistic argument for unification
from the complexity of life. It generalized, again, Duhem’s
holistic argument about prediction and testing; and he illustrated it
with the example of a forest fire:



Certainly, different kinds of laws can be distinguished from each
other: for example, chemical, biological or sociological laws;
however, it can 
not be said of a prediction of a concrete
individual process that it depend on one definite kind of law
only
. For example, whether a forest will burn down at a certain
location on earth depends as much on the weather as on whether human
intervention takes place or not. This intervention, however, can only
be predicted if one knows the laws of human behaviour. 
That is,
under certain circumstances, it must be possible to connect all kinds
of laws with each other
. Therefore all laws, whether chemical,
climatological or sociological, must be conceived as parts of a
system, namely of unified science. (Neurath 1931/1983, 59, orig.
itals.)




Laws of one kind may apply nicely to systems, phenomena or events
purely of one kind, but such things are not concrete individuals in
the real world. We may think of them as useful models or abstractions;
reality behaves more like them only in controlled settings, the
outcome of engineering, of planned design and construction, that is,
the materialized form of abstraction. Idealizations, like ideal types,
dangerously assume real separability between properties (Neurath
1941/1983, 225). In this sense, necessary experimentation for the
purpose of prediction and testing that control is key to observation
and in turn observation controls theory. In general, from that point
of view, exactness and scope requires the possibility of composing
models, laws and sciences of different kinds. Unity demands multiple
levels of integration and social cooperation.



The argument from holism would also serves th purpose of empiricist
demarcation against metaphysics: since metaphysical terms and
metaphysicians divide, whereas scientific terms and scientists unite.
Recall his practical standard of demarcation by integration mentioned
above. Metaphysical claims are uncontrollble and isolated.



The boat images further illustrated Neurath’s aim of unity,
within its proper epistemological framework: as a historically
situated, non-foundational and collective enterprise. Science is a
model and a resource for society and society is in turn a model and
resource for science.



In the context of the rise of logical empiricism, Neurath’s
campaign in support of the unity of science project was intellectual
and practical. It relied on rhetorical appeals to references to
historical precedents from such as Leibniz and
L’Encyclopédie (see SCIENTIFIC UNITY) as well as a
planned movement that involved a variety of institutions –Vienna
Circle, Institute of Unified Science–, events
–International Congresses for the Unity of Science– and
publications –International Encyclopedia of Unified
Science– (Neurath 1937a/1983, Reisch 1994, Symons et al.
2011).



What is the proposed model of unity? What is the opposed alternative?
Despite popular approaches suggesting a hierarchical, or pyramidal,
structure, which he associated with, among others, Comte, Ostwald and
then Carnap (in the 
Aufbau
 and in his subsequent doctrine of
physicalism), Neurath opposed the ideal of ‘pyramidism’
and a ‘system-model’: an axiomatic, precisely and
deductively closed and complete hierarchy of conceptually pure,
distinct and fixed sciences. He also dismissed the idea of ONE method
and ONE ideal language, for instance, mathematics or physics, followed
by all the other sciences (Neurath 1936/1983 and Neurath 1937b/1983).
Since 1910 Neurath’s approach to the issue was thoroughly
antireductionist: cognitively, logically and pragmatically. Each
science would fail to deal with the connections to others (Neurath
1910/2004). In particular, electron talk, Neurath insisted, is
irrelevant to understanding and predicting the complex behavior of
social groups. He had identified hierarchical reductionism across
disciplines in Carnap’s 
Aufbau
. It is worth noting that
Neurath’s encyclopedic disciplinary anti-reductionism is not in
conflict with the conceptual reductionist character of his physicalism
as a model of empiricism. In fact, this anti-reductionism may be
thought the nomological part of the doctrine of physicalism, alongside
its epistemological and metalinguistic elements (Uebel 2004).



The imperative of unity required that ‘it must be possible to
connect each law with every other law under certain circumstances, in
order to obtain new formulations’ (Neurath 1931/1983, 59).
Instead of the system-model, he proposed a weaker, dynamical and local
model of integration he called the ‘encyclopedia-model’: a
more or less coherent totality of scientific statements at a given
time, in flux, incomplete, with linguistic imprecisions and logical
indeterminacy and gaps, unified linguistically by the universal jargon
of physicalist language (not Carnap’s physicalism)—a
mixture of ‘cluster’ and ‘formula’—, the
cooperative and empiricist spirit, and the acceptance of a number of
methods or techniques (probability, statistics, etc), all providing
‘cross-connections’ (Neurath 1936/1983, 145–158 and
213–229).



The evolution of the sciences could be said to proceed from
encyclopedias to encyclopedias (a model weaker and more pluralistic
than those based on Kuhn’s paradigms and Foucault’s

epistèmes
, but closer to Carnap’s later notion
of linguistic frameworks; from this perspective, it seems less
paradoxical that Carnap published Kuhn’s 
The Structure of
Scientific Revolutions
 in the last volume of the International
Encyclopedia of Unified Science). Neurath spoke of a
‘mosaic’, an ‘aggregation’, an
interdisciplinary ‘orchestration’ of the sciences as
‘systematisation from below’ rather than a ‘system
from above’, especially, after World War II, carefully excluding
any form of ‘authoritative integration’, even favoring
‘cooperation in fruitful discussion’ to a socialist, Nazi
or totalitarian-sounding talk of a ‘programme’ (Neurath
1936/1983 and Neurath 1946/1983, 230–242). Correspondingly, his
later political writings emphasized internationalism, democracy and
plurality of institutional loyalties.


5. Philosophy of psychology, education, and the social sciences


5.1 Philosophy of psychology



Neurath’s attention to psychology was part of new disciplinary
landscape that connected and differentiated him from other thinkers.
Vienna became an international capital of psychological research while
logical empiricism started to develop a scientific epistemology and an
epistemology of science. Freud’s psychoanalysis was more popular
than J.B. Watson’s American behaviorism and Gestalt psychology
was dominant neither in psychology nor in scientific philosophy. In
the Vienna Circle’s manifesto, the official programmatic
position was weariness and rejection of much contemporary
psychological language. It was considered plagued with conceptual
imprecision, logical inconsistency and, most fatally, meaningless,
untestable metaphysical elements. The project’s emphasis on
perception led to adopting behaviorist psychology as the natural
intellectual ally consistent with the Circle’s scientific
world-conception (Carnap, Hahn and Neurath 1929/1973, 314-5,
Hardcastle 2007).



Like Kant, Popper was interested in a transcendental and regulative
philosophy, and, more so than Kant, he hailed science as the paradigm
of intellectual activity. In 1928 Popper finished his doctoral
dissertation, ‘On the Methodological Problem of Cognitive
Psychology’. Popper set out to understand the relations between
logic, biology and psychology in the production of knowledge and
thereby to outline the methodological preconditions of cognitive
psychology. Two alternative views of psychology were available to
Popper through two doctoral examiners, Karl Bühler and Moritz
Schlick.



Schlick represented Gestalt theory as psychology within the reductive
framework of physicalism, that is, rejecting the existence of
autonomous entities, laws and methods of psychology.
Bühler’s career was central to Austrian psychology and to
socialist Red Vienna culture. With Ostwald Külpe in
Würtzburg he had engaged in empirical research on thought
processes—contra Wundt’s atomistic psychology-; they paid
special attention to imageless thought and the importance of language.
In 1912 Bühler had originally contributed to Gestalt psychology
with the discussion of simple Gestalt forms involved in the perception
of proportions of geometrical figures and ended concentrating on his
cognitive phenomenon of the ‘aha experience’, a sudden
insight in problem solving.



In Vienna, Otto Glöckel, founder of the world-renowned Vienna
School Reform movement and president of the Vienna School Board,
offered to fund for the Bühler and his child-pscyhology wife a
psychological laboratory. Child psychology and education were seen
central to the socialsit project of creating a New Man. His interest
in language and philosophy brought him closer to Schlick
(Wittgenstein’s sister Margaret organized social occasions for
Wittgenstein, the Bühlers and the Schlicks to meet) and he
encouraged his students to attend Vienna Circle seminars (Egon
Brunswick, Elsa Frankel, Marie Jahoda, Paul Lazersfeld, Rudolf Ekstein
and Edith Weisskopf). In the wake of earlier discussions of crises in
physics and mathematics, in 1927 he published 
Die Krise der
Psychologie
 (
The Crisis of Psychology
). In the book,
Bühler argued that the problem of explaining the social
significance of language showed that psychology has lost the
complexity and richness required to synthesize three levels of
psychology: experience, behavior and intellectual structure
(Bühler 1927, Hacohen 2000 and Humphrey 1951). A framework was
needed for unifying the different narrow ‘schools’ of
psychology: Behaviorism, Gestalt theory, psychoanalysis,
associationism, and humanistic psychology. They were deficient in
their narrow domain of application. The unity of psychology demanded
methodological pluralism at the point of cooperation.



Initially Popper had tied the scientific status of psychology to the
notion that induction is the empirical method of the natural sciences
and wrote on the inductive basis of pedagogy (ter Hark 2002, and
Gattei 2004, 453). In his second thesis, on the method of cognitive
psychology, Popper declared that psychology was better off autonomous,
discovering empirically new laws and phenomena that only subsequently
might or might not prove reducible to a material interpretation.
Popper critiqued Gestalt psychology by analogy with
Bühler’s problem regarding language: Gestalt psychology was
too narrow to establish the conditions of possibility of cognitive
psychology and the logic of intellectual structures. He was further
interested in the Viennese Otto Selz’s holistic, functional
notion of ‘total task’, based on a psychological mechanism
of trial and error (this notion would later inspire not only
Popper’s pedagogy, but elements of his scientific methodology of
hypotheses and falsification, conjectures and refutations).



In the 
Aufbau
 Carnap associated Watson’s behaviorism
with a physicalist basis for a construction system, whereas Gestalt
psychology was better suited to reflect the origin of the concepts in
our system of knowledge –it was also better than Mach’s
atomism of sensations– (Carnap 1928 and 1932). Here Carnap was
seeking to accommodate the epistemic value of individual experience
while preserving the objective form of scientific knowledge (Friedman
1999). Experience contributed a complex holistic stream—a
‘true’, ‘organic’ whole—out of which the
elementary empirical concepts must be abstracted, by the process he
called quasi-analysis.



Like Wittgenstein and Popper, Neurath was interested in education and
cognitive psychology (especially during the Red Vienna period; and,
like Popper, also in connection with socialist goals). Neurath’s
crusade for unified science against speculative metaphysics prompted
him in 1931 to propose the unified framework of physicalism for all
acceptable scientific concepts, statements and theories. As mentioned
above, it was a materialist view that knowledge (science) can speak
only of observable events, things and processes in space and time.
This normative view aimed to unify the natural and the human sciences,
yet it did not require any reduction to physics.



Neurath rejected, accordingly, the language of the unconscious and the
ego, subjective mental states devoid of material (physiological),
perceptual, or operational correlates. All events and processes, all
perceptual, speech and thought terms involved in the production of
empirical data were to be taken physicalistically, e.g., as
descriptions of spatio-temporal structures involving behavior or
bodily—anatomical and physiological- changes under given
observed conditions (Neurath 1931/1983, 55).



Neurath’s goal was also to achieve a unity of acceptable
empirical formulations in psychology. The only acceptable
psychological positions were the kinds of behaviorism championed by
J.B. Watson, E.C. Tolman, and F.B. Skinner and physiological theories
(Neurath 1931a/1983, 50; 1931b/1983, 55; 1932a/1983, 63, 67, and 73).
Yet he also drew some distance between physicalism and behaviorism by
declaring the latter both too narrow and too broad, and containing
non-physicalist notions (Neurath 1936/1983, 164). He came to
distinguish behaviorism, in this narrow sense, from
‘behavioristics’, the emphasis on perceptual
considerations of behavior within the framework of physicalism
(Neurath 1933/1987, 13). Neurath mentioned Gestalt theory as one of
the schools of psychology alongside behaviorism and psychoanalysis
disrupting the unity of psychology as a discipline (implicitly echoing
Bühler’s earlier lamentations; Neurath 1937/1983,
172–3, and 1933/1987, 15), but he did not mention Gestalt as an
example of scientific psychology (on this point claims in Cat 2005
require qualification). He merely pointed to the promise of its
empirical contributions to scientific behaviorism with a rejection of
its talk of holistic properties as metaphysical danglers (Neurath
1933/1987, 17–8).


5.2 Philosophy of education



As mentioned above, psychology and pedagogy were inseparable in
Vienna’s intellectual, scientific and political culture of the
1920s. Glöckel’s school reform movement of 1922 onwards
advocated empirical research in pedagogy, it separated school from
church and promoted social equality. Child welfare became a central
concern and, for intellectual and or political reasons, attracted the
pedagogical interest of Popper, Wittgenstein and Neurath (on Popper
see Hacohen 2002; Wittgenstein see Bartley 1974 and Peters 2001). In
their pedagogical activities one can find the roots of some of their
epistemological views. Popper and Wittgenstein became school-teachers
and Wittgenstein even published in 1925 a spelling dictionary,

Wörterbuch für Volksschullen
.



Lili Roubiczek, a student of Maria Montessori in London and Karl
Bühler in Vienna established a Montessori school in 1923 and soon
Montessori ideas attracted educators and psychologists alike (from
Charlotte Bühler to Anna Freud) (Kramer 1988). Montessori
stressed the idea of the child’s capacity for active
self-directed learning through sensory and motor interaction with the
environment with guidance and error-correcting feedback. Gestalt
psychologists, psychoanalysts and others defended similarly active
models of the child’s mind. Popper’s awareness of
Montessori methods in the 1920s stemmed from several opportunities:
his pedagogical training, his friendship with a carpenter who made
toys for a Montessori orphanage and turned him to cabinet-making and
the Montessori-inspired ‘Socratic method’ of his admired
Kantian critical philosopher Leonard Nelson (Hacohen 2000, 90 and
122).



Neurath’s views on education, as did his scientific
epistemology, integrated social, political, scientific and empiricist
elements in a mutually reinforcing manner. The most influential
example and outcome of his views were the development and application
of the ISOTYPE method of visual education (See the supplementary
document
 
Visual Education
.).



For Neurath, education involves 
argument
 and

discussion
. It is in this sense dialogical. The term
‘argument’ was used by Neurath broadly, to include the
case or point being made and communicated, both senses of
demonstration. Neurath wrote that to argue requires one to distinguish
between essentials and incidentals (Neurath 1945/1973, 239). So, a
visual argument is ‘a combination of verbal and visual aids
leading to the essentials’ (
ibid
., 240).



Under the aegis of the values of social cooperation, neutrality and
universality that characterized his thinking, Neurath sought a
universal medium for the communication of knowledge that combined
visual perception and scientific information. Science is ‘the
typical species of arguing which human beings of all nations, rich and
poor, have in common’ (
ibid
., 229). The choice of the
visual, later linked to his empiricism, was also prompted by models of
education and interest in children. Quoting from the Victorian
self-improvement author Samuel Smiles, he declared that ‘all
persons are more or less apt to learn through the eyes rather than the
ear… especially the case in early youth, when the eye is the
chief inlet of knowledge’ (Neurath 1946, 100). This approach was
consistent with Montessori’s and other contemporary educational
theories as well as with typical approaches to science education. He
repeatedly pointed to another Victorian hero of his, Britain’s
foremost experimental scientist and popular science educator, Michael
Faraday, and his 
Course of Six
 
Lectures on the Chemical
History of a Candle
 (1861), which was intended primarily for
children. Given the importance he placed on scientific information,
also socially, the main challenge he routinely took up became the
concretization of abstract information, especially the visual
communication of statistical information. In that regard, he also
believed that visual education provided a unifying framework that
bridged the gap between science and the humanities (Neurath 1945/1973,
234).



Education requires 
simplification
, that is, the empiricist
notion of 
abstraction
 in the face of the complexity of facts.
Teaching requires knowing what to leave out, what counts as
superfluous detail and accuracy: ‘he who knows best what to omit
is the best teacher’ and so ‘to remember simplified
pictures is better than to forget accurate figures’ (Neurath
1933/1973, 220 and 1945a, 440). The graphic, visual counterpart of
this point constitutes the basis for his design of ISOTYPE icons, by
analogy with the method of silhouettes, so popular in Austrian art, as
a form of visual abstraction for the communication of information
about types or general concepts. The approach was consistent with the
empiricist anti-metaphysical spirit and Bauhaus and modernist
aesthetics of the rejection of ornament famously advocated by the
Viennese architect Adolf Loos in 
Ornament and Crime
 (1908)
also echoed by Neurath in 1926: ‘the time of ornaments is
over’ (recounted by Ernst Niekisch in Neurath 1973, 22).



In line with the Viennese School Reform movement led by Glöckel
and his own scientific attitude, he adopted an scientific approach to
visual education: by applying accepted recent ideas from empirical
disciplines such as developmental psychology, anthropology, art
history, even ideas by his Encyclopedia co-editor Charles Morris in
his 
Foundations of a Theory of Signs
 (Morris 1938); and by
testing the end-products, albeit with different degrees of rigor (see
the supplementary document on
 
Visual Education
).



Neurath was aware of the values and limitations of the elements of
visual education (see below), and admitted the diversity of tools and
values with the same kind of 
pluralism
, 
holism
 and

pragmatism
 he adopted in his economic theory and more general
scientific epistemology: each educational media had educational
characteristics of each own that are incomparable and non-additive,
cannot be ranked and serve different purposes (Neurath 1944, 56,
Neurath 1945/1973, 238 and Neurath 1946, 99).



The sensual dimension of education is part of the larger goal of

humanization
: the elimination of secret knowledge and
exclusive communities. Education involves the language of daily life
and the avoidance of unnecessary technical terms, and thereby enables
organized humanity, including international cooperation (Neurath
1945/1973, 231).



More intellectually, education involves 
comparison
 (Neurath
1945/1973, 238). But the comparative analysis, which Hume made a
staple of empiricist methodology, does not exhaust the gamut of
intellectual values. The exploration of incomparable or alternative
possibilities is a key cognitive goal of education that was to make
the other specific practices possible (logically and psychologically).
He called this 
meditation
: besides handing out knowledge,
education involves a transfer of criticism, a meditative mood and
atmosphere, and the ability to consider matter under discussion from
all sides (possible and actual perspectives within the pluralistic
attitude) (
ibid
., 233). Again, this aspect of his philosophy
of education featured also in his thinking on economic and social
theory, practical rationality and scientific method.



Education should discourage narrow specialization (recall his early
arguments for the unification of the sciences). Since the holistic and
synthetic model of socialization, epistemology and science requires
the consideration of alternative perspectives and the integration of
different kinds of knowledge. Neurath praised the Danish pedagogical
model of university education, a Philosophy Faculty in the medieval
comprehensive, universalist spirit of the scholastic meaning of
‘university’. In the setting of one of the Congresses of
the Unity of Science Movement, he praised the requirement at
University of Copenhagen of mandatory science and philosophy courses
for students of all specialties, and Joerg Joergensen’s lectures
on scientific thinking based on historical explanation and logical
reasoning (Neurath 1938).



Education depends on 
intellectual ethos and social values
 as
well. Education includes what he called also the habits of scientific
attitude: habits of ‘
sincerity
 of research and

integrity
 of arguing’ (Neurath 1946/1973, 233).
Education involves also 
tolerance
: the transfer of tradition
is a preference within one community, not an expression of an absolute
higher point of view above other communities, also a preference among
others within that community independent of that tradition
(
ibid
., 229). It is worth noting that Neurath, and later his
wife Anna Schapire, had been inspired very early on by the social
views on education and feminism of the Swedish social reformer and
educator Ellen Key (see Sandner 2014).



The social dimension was a recurring theme even though with changing
connotations or emphasis, from post-WWI socialism to post-WWII
internationalism. Public education was dependent on an institutional
basis consisting of a number of institutions: schools, museums and
other places holding public exhibitions, and periodicals (Neurath
1931/1973, 222). Neurath was director of the Social and Economic
Museum in Vienna from 1924 until 1934. Not coincidently, his cousin
Waldemar Kaempffert planned and proceeded along lines similar to
Neurath’s during his tenure as director of the Museum for
Science and Industry of Chicago from 1928 until 1931.



The social dimension extended to groups, generations and nations
related by education as the process of 
group
 
transfer of
traditions
: ‘Education may be regarded as the transfer of
certain traditions in a more or less systematized way, from one person
to another person, from one group of persons to another group,
particularly from one generation to the next. It is also the transfer
of tradition from one nation to another’ (Neurath 1945/1973,
228).



It also extended to political arrangements, from 
socialism

and 
democracy
 to ideals of 
international
cooperation
. The earlier views emphasized the socialist
significance of education as condition of democracy in the form of
informed participation and of cooperation, since ‘successful
collaboration is possible only when those who act fix on one
possibility, whether by agreement or by propaganda’ (Neurath
1928/1973, 293). Education as spreading of knowledge is required for
everyone involved in taking common decisions and hence for the working
of democracy (Neurath 1945/1973, 230). Democratic society, Neurath
concluded, requires a common language (
ibid
., 247). Post-WWII
internationalism became a motivation for visual education
(
ibid
., 234, 247). The goals of a common language without
common laws and a common language for common knowledge and cooperation
rendered visual language a socio-political tool, the non-dictatorial
basis for a potential human brotherhood (
ibid
., 248). In both
contexts, Neurath offered a criticism of elitist individualistic
teaching with a contrast between Anglo-Saxon education methods linked
to empiricism and utilitarianism and Nazi education linked to German
romanticism and transcendentalism (Neurath 1945b, 370–1).



The social and political valence of education provided the framework
for linking education to social structures such as entrenched
institutions, techniques and habits involving advertising and
entertainment that supported the relevant cognitive models such as
visual media: ‘Modern man is conditioned by the cinema and a
wealth of illustrations. He gets much of his knowledge during leisure
hours in the most pleasing way through his eyes. If one wants to
spread social knowledge, one should use means similar to modern
advertisement’ (Neurath 1925/1973, 214). In the latter context,
Neurath stressed the superiority of visual education to verbal
education as the basis for international or general education:
‘words divide, pictures unite’ (Neurath 1931/1973,
217).


5.3 Philosophy of the social sciences



As in the case of philosophy of psychology, Neurath intended his
theory of the social sciences to be a bridge between the natural and
the human sciences and an exmplary application of the logical
empiricist framework. Philosophy was now the reflexive perspective of
unified science and it was constituted by two meta-theoretical
approaches to science: logical analysis and empirical theory, that is,
the ‘logic of science’—emphasized by Carnap—
and the ‘behavioristics of science’—emphasized by
Neurath.



The application of physicalism encompassed psychology, history,
economics, anthropology and sociology without reducing them to
physics. Social sciences are scientific within the framework of
physicalism, namely, insofar as they describe concrete spatially and
temporally ordered events and processes and make predictions about
them (Neurath 1931b/1973, 325). According to Neurath, social behavior
is itself a complex and its prediction requires that sociology
incorporate various sources such as history, ethics, jurisprudence,
economics, ethnography, etc. (
ibid
., 328). One example was
Marx’s study of capital. For Neurath it was important first and
foremost as an instance of empirical research that brings together
history and economics, and the most complete case of physicalist
sociology (
ibid
., 349). Sociology is a synthetic effort part
of in turn a larger synthetic effort that is unified science, the set
of all connectible languages and laws required to describe and predict
order. The synthetic dimension is inseparable from the empirical one:
It is the formal, linguistic and conceptual, expression of the
totalistic, holist approach required by the conception of empirical
reality as a complex, including the phenomena of ‘concrete ways
of life’.



The alliance between unity and empiricism, or physicalism, is thrown
into further relief by contrast with the post-Diltheyan German
sociology of Windelband, Rickert, Sombart and Weber. They
distinguished between the natural and the social sciences and, as
distinctive feature of the latter, in Weber’s sociology there
appear non-scientific, non-behavioristic entities and activities such
as the spirit of the age (
Zeitgeist
), and empathy or
understanding, poetic activity that grounds what he calls
‘
Verstehende
 sociology’ (
ibid
., 353).
Neurath’s was willing to accept the use of some such concepts
provided they could be given a physicalistic meaning (Uebel 2004 and
2019).



Neurath emphasized attention to individuals and groups, individuated
in terms of stimulus/response interrelationship and clusters of shared
customs and habits, and, for instance, the transfer of such habits or
traditions (
ibid
., 371), which is how he defined education
(see above). Linked to Mach’s bio-economic ideas,
Neurath’s sociology relied on biological elements.



The empirical conceptualization of the social units is Gestalt-like
and holistic, like the silhouettes, patterns or profiles of total life
plans: ‘Peoples, states, age groups, religious communities, all
are complexes built up of single individuals. Such composite groups
have certain interconnections which are ruled by laws, and they have a
definite ‘physiognomy’. The separate features of these
complexes are not independent of each other but are related’
(
ibid
., 387). Decisions and predictions, as in the case of
social planning, often involved the ‘comparison of total
complexes’ (
ibid
.).



Citing Mill, Neurath noted that empiricism brings the natural and the
social sciences together, but so do some of its 
limits
. The
markers of empirical science are the practices of observation,
experimentation and prediction. Laws are merely vehicles for taking us
from the concrete and unique to the concrete and unique, whether in
biology or history. Sociology is like geology and biology in that the
possibility of many 
experiments
 is prevented by certain
constraints of ethical values or scale (
ibid
., 365).




Predictability
 is characterized by nine conditions.



(1) It is based on the availability of generalizations about groups
and (2) of stable conditions, or control, and for a limited period.
Control is a key notion that connects empiricism and engineering,
mechanical and social. Neurath didn’t think that laws of
physics, for instance, are in that sense more universal or
unconditioned: ‘Mariotte’s law in physics holds only
within certain limits’ (
ibid
., 331).



(3) Correlations on which predictions are based are the product of
induction, and inductive conclusions, in sociology as elsewhere, are
based on a decision (Neurath 1931b/1973, 407).



(4) Moreover, sociology, like the natural sciences, often has recourse
to information, including laws, from other disciplines, in a local
synthetic effort of predictive value (
ibid
., 364).



(5) Holism prevents sociology from the ‘ideal forecast’
associated with the fiction of the Laplacean mind and the availability
of molecular descriptions of individuals free from instabilities (in a
symposium on Pasqual Jordan’s quantum mechanics, Neurath
addressed the new perspective from quantum mechanics on the problem of
free will and its conflict with the determinism (causality) of natural
laws as riddled with metaphysics (Neurath 1935)). One may not expect,
however, that aggregations or complexes will be always more
predictable than individuals, since the evolution of the complex might
depend on the interaction with individuals and the environment in a
way affected by chance. Instead, it has to make do with ‘rough
facts of a complex character’ (
ibid
., 405) in a
‘system of entangled habits’ (
ibid
., 371 and
374), and most social types of behavior in a group are not
‘autonomously computable’ and have to be regarded as
‘parts of the complex that is being investigated at the
time’, considering ‘the whole of life’ of the group,
since each ‘historical period = non-analysed complex of
conditions’ (Neurath 1932a/1983, 76 and 85); he would
subsequently speak of aggregations (Neurath 1944a). Any resulting
prediction or explanation (retrodiction) of individual behavior is an
approximation to a ‘world history without names.’



(6) A linguistic implication is that empiricism in general and the
social sciences in particular are dependent on non-univocal,
indistinct terms—‘a “clot” (German

Ballung
, French 
grégat
)’—, in
both protocol statements (see above) and theories insofar as they are
sensitive to cultural phenomena and historically inherited concepts
that cannot be usefully replaced with precise technical terms of the
‘modern international folklore’ (Neurath 1944a, 5–7,
18).



(7) The ‘multivocality’ of the relation between phenomena
and theoretical interpretations is more pervasive than the sort of
pluralism Duhem noted in physics, and lead Neurath to speak of
‘pluri-items’ (
ibid
., 14).



(8) Certain phenomena or entities such as inventions can only be
predicted provided one has also the means to create them (Neurath
1931b/1973, 405); this insight is typically attributed to the critic
of Neurath Popper, who published it much later (Uebel 2004).



(9) Sociological predictions are co-determinants in the occurrence of
the predicted event, for instance a position in the stock market or a
political revolution (
ibid
., 405); the prediction may have a
reinforcing or a preventive character (he wrote about self-fulfilling
prophecies as early as 1921, in his polemic against Spengler; Neurath
1921). Theory becomes part of practice; scientist becomes part of the
social scene (
ibid
., 406; Uebel 2004).



A related issue is Max Weber’s issue of 
value-freedom
,
and objectivity, in the social sciences. Neurath noted, with Weber,
that all sciences are based on values that determine the choice of
relevant aspects, phenomena, quantities, etc. This is not just
consistent with, but an implication of his voluntarism and his
‘rationalism’. He insisted on scientists exploring and.
proposing technical solutions to social problems that eventually
required non-technical social or political choices. Value-free methods
are central, with qualifications, to scientific practice. The
formulation of a question or the choice of a quantity might be
value-dependent but their respective answer or measurement will not be
so in the same sense (
ibid
., 364–5). Neurath formulated
the same idea in terms of theory-dependence: the putting right
questions and making the right observations require a
‘meta-concept’ or an ‘approximate theory’
(
ibid
., 388–89).



In spite of these caveats, the value of the social sciences remains
attached to the value of empirical knowledge and the scientific
attitude in the social roots of our life: ‘Even where
sociologists cannot make predictions, they may provide men of action
or meditation with empiricist material. (…) We argue
differently and act differently when we know the material provided by
the social sciences. (…) altering our scientific language is
cohesive with altering out social and private life’ (Neurath
1944a, 46).



Finally, we should address the reflexive value of the social sciences
insofar as science plays the meta-theoretical and critical role of
philosophy, displacing any alternative, autonomous and speculative
source of insight. History of science, for instance, will require
adequate classifications for the purposes of advancing correlations.
In that regard, it will benefit from avoiding narrow dichotomies of
classification and adopt, instead, the notion of theory –
applied in economic planning – that aims at exploring all
possibilities in the form of a matrix of combinations, realized and
unrealized (in the tradition of encyclopedic and symbolic calculus of
Llull and Leibniz). Neurath himself provided an application to the
case of optics (Neurath 1916/1983 and Neurath 1944a, 42). Similarly
for sociology, the search of an adequate classification of hypotheses
in the first step.



From a historical perspective, Neurath followed anthropologists such
as Frazer and Levy-Bruhl considering magical thinking primordial and
universal. It acted as a primitive, empirical and causal thinking with
instrumental value and unlike metaphysics, according to Neurath it
resembled the modern empiricist scientific world-conception and
facilitated its introduction, –which replaced it with unified
science.



Notice, however, that the epistemological relativism associated with
logical empiricism is not the outcome solely of such external
sociological perspective or naturalistic and empirical considerations
about scientific practice. It was implied by the philosophical
rejection of Kant’s synthetic a priori and, as alternative to
Kant’s approach to apriorism, the development of conventionalism
by Carnap, Reichenbach and others inherited from Duhem,
Poincaré and others concerning the exact sciences (Nemeth 2007,
283–4). Otherwise, Neurath pointed to the reflexivity of the
social character of science itself and declared that sociologists
argued, decided and acted in science as they themselves and others do
in society. They are on the same boat with us; the boat of social
sciences is just like that of the unified science and of social
planning itself. This notion of social scientists, thinking up and
putting in place possibilities under conditions of uncertainty,
prompted Neurath’s final version of the boat analogy:



Imagine sailors, who, far out at sea, transform the shape of their
clumsy vessel from a more circular to a more fishlike one. They make
use of some drifting timber, besides the timber of the old structure,
to modify the skeleton and the hull of their vessel. But they cannot
put the ship in dock in order to start from scratch. During their work
they stay on the old structure and deal with heavy gales and
thundering waves. In transforming their ship they take care that
dangerous leakages do not occur. A new ship grows out of the old one,
step by step—and while they are still building, the sailors may
already be thinking of a new structure, and they will not always agree
with one another. The whole business will go on in a way that we
cannot even anticipate today. That is our fate. (Neurath 1944a, 47)




Criticisms came from Viennese social scientists such as Karl Menger,
Edgar Zilsel and Felix Kaufmann. Zilsel, an ally of the Circle,
objected to the programmatic nature of Neurath’s foundational
work, namely, that it was empiricism without empirical research. They
all objected to the narrow strictures on the relation between the
natural and the human sciences imposed by physicalism. Kaufmann, in
particular, defended a phenomenological sociology, following Husserl
much more closely than Carnap especially did, based on the value of
introspective experience, although without the scientifically
mysterious Weberian method of empathy (Uebel 2007, 255–57).



Zilsel, Frank and Neurath had learned from Mach the value of history
as a creative source of theoretical possibilities and critical
perspective. Mach had called his approach ‘historical-critical
method’ which echoed in his heirs’ ears with relevant
references to Kant and Marx, and was understood to support the
rejection of superhuman metaphysical inevitability. Like Reichenbach,
Zilsel replaced the Kantian inquiry into the preconditions of the
possibility scientific knowledge with more modest and
anti-metaphysical projects, in his case, centered on the
empirical—social political, economic-preconditions. Later on,
Philip Frank advocated the empirical historical studies of science as
part of the more complete answer to the question of the choice of
hypotheses raised by Duhem and Poincaré, and the insufficiency
of the logical inference that grounded their conventionalism. These
are important sources and precedents of modern empirical studies of
science.






Bibliography


Primary Literature: Neurath’s Works




1909a,‘Ernst Schröders Beweis des 12. Theorems:
Für die identischen Operationen gilt das
’Kommutationgesetz’’, in Neurath 1981, 1–3.


1909b, ‘Eindeutigkeit und Kommutativität’, in
Neurath 1981, 17–18.


1909c, 
Antike Wirtschaftgeschichte
, Leipzig:
Teubner.


1910a, ‘Definitionsgleicheit und symbolische
Gleicheit’, in Neurath 1981, 19–21.


1910b, ‘On the Theory of Social Science’, in Neurath
2004, 265–91.


1910c, 
Lehrbuch der Volkwirtschaftslehre
, Vienna:
Hölder.


1911, ‘Nationalökonomie und Wertlehre’,

Zeitschrift für Volkswirtschaft, Sozialpolitik und
Verwaltung
, 20: 52–114.


1912/1973, ‘The Problem of the Pleasure Maximum’, in
Neurath 1973, 113–22.


1913/1983, ‘The Lost Wanderers of Descartes and the
Auxiliary Motive (On the Psychology of Decision)’, in Neurath
1983, 1–12.


1916/1983, ‘On the Classification of Systems of
Hypotheses’, in Neurath 1983, 13–31.


1917/2004, ‘The Conceptual Structure of Economics and Its
Foundation’, in Neurath 2004, 312–344.


1919/1973, ‘Through War Economy to Economy in Kind’,
in Neurath 1973, 123–157.


1920/1973, ‘Socialization of Bavaria’, in Neurath
1973, 18–28.


1920/2004, ‘A System of Socialization’, in Neurath
2004, 345–370.


1921/1973, ‘Anti-Spengler’, in Neurath 1973,
158–213.


1925/1973, ‘The Social and Economic Museum in Vienna’,
in Neurath 1973, 214.


1928/1973, ‘Personal Life and Class Struggle’, in
Neurath 1973, 249–98.


1930/1983, ‘Ways of the Scientific World Conception’,
in Neurath 1983, 32–47.


1931a/1973, ‘Visual Education and the Social and Economic
Museum in Vienna’, in Neurath 1973, 215–218.


1931b/1973, ‘Empirical Sociology’, in Neurath 1973,
319–421.


1931a/1983, ‘Physicalism: The Philosophy of the Vienna
Circle’, in Neurath 1983, 48–51.


1931b/1983, ‘Physicalism’, in Neurath 1983, 52–7.


1932a/1983, ‘Sociology in the Framework of
Physicalism’, in Neurath 1983, 58–90.


1932b/1983, ‘Protocol Statements’, in Neurath 1983,
91–99.


1933, ‘L’Urbanisme et le Lotissement du Sol en
Representation Optique d’après la Méthode
Viennoise’, 
Annales Techniques
 44–46,
1153–4.


1933/1987, ‘Unified Science and Psychology’, in B.
McGuinness 1987, ed., 
Unified Science
, Dordrecht: Reidel,
1–23.


1934/1983, ‘Radical Physicalism and “the Real
World”’, in Neurath 1983, 100–14.


1935/1983, ‘Pseudorationalism of Falsification’, in
Neurath 1983, 121–31.


1935/1987, ‘What Is Meant by a Rational Economic
Theory?’, in B. McGuinness 1987, ed., 
Unified Science
,
Dordrecht: Reidel, 67–109.


1936a/1983, ‘Individual Sciences, Unified Science,
Pseudorationalism’, in Neurath 1983, 132–138.


1936b/1983, ‘Encyclopedia as Model’, in Neurath 1983,
145–58.


1937a/1983, ‘Unity of Science and its Encyclopedia’,
in Neurath 1983, 172–82.


1937b/1983, ‘The Departmentalization of Unified
Science’, in Neurath 1983, 200–5.


1938, ‘Encyclopedism as a Pedagogical Aim: A Danish
Approach’, 
Philosophy of Science
, 5(4):
484–92.


1939, 
Modern Man in the Making
, New York: Knopf.


1941/1983, ‘Universal Jargon and Terminology’, in
Neurath 1983, 213–29.


1942/1973, ‘International Planning for Freedom’, in
Neurath 1973, 442–70.


1943, ‘Planning or Managerial Revolution?’ 
The New
Commonwealth Quarterly
, 8(4): 148–54.


1944a, 
Foundations of the Social Sciences
, in O. Neurath,
R. Carnap, Ch. Morris, eds., 
International Encyclopedia of Unified
Science
, vol. 2, n.1, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.


1944b, ‘Visual Aids and Arguing’, 
New Era
,
25(3): 51–61.


1945a, ‘Education Through the Eye’, 
Journal of
Education
, 77: 914.


1945b, ‘German Education and Democracy’, 
Journal
of Education
, 77: 370–1.


1945/1973, ‘Visual Education: Humanisation versus
Popularisation’, in Neurath 1973, 227–248.


1945/2004, ‘Alternative to Market Competition. Review of

The Road to Serfdom
’, in Neurath 2004,
546–548.


1946, ‘From Hieroglyphics to Isotypes’, extracts from
a visual autobiography, with introduction by Paul Rotha, in 
Future
Books
, 46(3): 92–100.


1973, 
Empiricism and Sociology
, R. S. Cohen and M.
Neurath, eds., Dordrecht: Reidel.


1981, 
Gesammelte philosophische und methodologische
Schriften
, R. Haller and H. Rutte, eds., Vienna:
Hölder-Pichler-Tempsky.


1983, 
Philosophical Papers 1913–1946
, R.S. Cohen and M.
Neurath, eds., Dordrecht: Reidel.


1991, 
Gesammelte bildpädagogische Schriften
, R.
Haller and R. Kinross, eds., Vienna: Hölder-Pichler-Tempsky.


1994, 
Otto Neurath oder Die Einheit von Wissenschaft und
Gesellschaft
. P. Neurath and E. Nemeth (eds.), Vienna:
Böhlau.


1996, ‘Visual Education: Humanisation versus
Popularisation’, in F. Stadler and E. Nemeth, eds., 1996,
245–335.


1998, 
Gesammelte ökonomische, soziologische und
sozialpolitische Schriften
, vols. 1 and 2. R. Haller and U.
Hoefer, eds., Vienna: Hölder-Pichler-Tempsky.


2004, 
Selected Economic Writings
, R.S. Cohen and T.E.
Uebel (eds.), Dordrecht: Kluwer.




Collaborative Works




Carnap, R., H. Hahn and O. Neurath, 1929/1973, ‘The
Scientific Conception of the World: The Vienna Circle’, in
Neurath 1973, 299–318.


Carnap, R., Ch. Morris, and O. Neurath (eds.), 1970,

Foundations of the Unity of Science. Towards an International
Encyclopedia of Unified Science
, vols. 1 and 2, Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.


Hahn, O. and O. Neurath, 1909, ‘Zum Dualismus in der
Logik’, in Neurath 1981, 5–16.




Primary works by other authors and secondary Literature




Anderson, D., 2019, ‘Rejecting Semantic Truth: On the
Significance of Neurath’s Syntacticism’, in Cat and Tuboly
(eds.) 2019, 363–82.


Ballod, K./Atlanticus (pseud.), 1898, 
Produktion und Konsum im
Sozialstaat
, Stuttgart: Dietz.


Bartley, W.W., 1973, 
Wittgenstein
, New York: J.B.
Lippincott.


Bentley, J., 2019, 
Logical Empiricism and Naturalism.
Neurath’s and Carnap’s Metatheory of Science
 (Vienna
Circle Library), Cham: Springer.


Blaug, M., 1996, 
Economic Theory in Retrospect
,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.


–––, 1997, 
Great Economists Before
Keynes
, Cheltenham: Edward Elgar.


Bloor, D., 1997, 
Wittgenstein, Rules and Institutions
,
London: Routledge.


Boon, T., 2008, 
Films of Fact. A history of Science in
Documentary Films and Television
, London: Wallflower Press.


Bühler, K., 1927, 
Die Krise der Psychologie
, Jena:
Fischer.


Burke, C., E. Kindel and S. Walker, eds., 2014, 
Isotype.
Design and Contexts 1925–1971
, London: Hyphen Press.


Burke, M. and T. Haggitt, 1999, ‘Words Divide; Pictures
Unite. Otto Neurath and British Propaganda Films of the Second World
War’, 
Imperial War Museum Review
, 12: 59–71.


Carnap, R., 1928, 
Der logische Aufbau der Welt
, Berlin:
Bernary.


–––, 1932/1987, ‘On Protocol
Sentences’, 
Noûs
, 21: 457–470.


–––, 1932/1934, 
The Unity of Science
,
London: Kegan Paul, Trench, Teubner and Co.


–––, 1934/1937, 
The Logical Syntax of
Language
, London: Kegan Paul, Trench, Trubner and Co.


Cartwright, N., J. Cat, L. Fleck and T.E. Uebel, 1996, 
Otto
Neurath: Philosophy Between Science and Politics
, Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.


Carus, A.W., 2019, ‘Neurath and Carnap on Semantics’,
in Cat and Tuboly (eds.) 2019, 339–62.


Cat, J., 1995, ‘The Popper-Neurath Debate and
Neurath’s Attack on Scientific Method’, 
Studies in the
History and Philosophy of Science
, 26(2): 219–250.


–––, 2005, ‘Switching Gestalts on Gestalt
Psychology: On the Relation Between Science and Philosophy’,

Perspectives on Science
, 15(2): 131–177.


–––, 2019, ‘Neurath and the Legacy of
Algebraic Logic’, in Cat and Tuboly (eds.) 2019, 241–338.


–––, 2024, ‘Money and Philosophy in
Vienna: Otto Neurath and Ludwig Wittgenstein’, in J. Tinguely,
ed., 
Palgrave Handbook of Philosophy and Money
 (Volume 2),
London: Palgrave.


Cat, J., N. Cartwright and H. Chang, 1991, ‘Otto Neurath:
Unification as the Way to Socialism’, in J. Mittelstrass, ed.,

Einheit der Wissenschaften
, Berlin: de Gruyter.


–––, H. Chang and N. Cartwright, 1996,
‘Otto Neurath: Politics and the Unity of Science’, in P.
Galison and D. Stump, eds., 
The Disunity of Science
,
Stanford: Stanford University Press, 347–69.


Cat, J. and A. T. Tuboly (eds.), 2019, 
Neurath Reconsidered.
New sources and Perspectives
, Cham: Springer.


Chaloupek, G.K., 1990, ‘The Austrian Debate on Economic
Calculation in a Socialist Economy’, 
Journal of History of
Political Economy
, 22: 659–75.


–––, 2008, ‘Otto Neurath’s Concepts
of Socialization and Economic Calculation and His Socialist
Critics’, in E. Nemeth et al. (eds.) 2008, 61–76.


Chang, R. (ed.), 1997, 
Incommensurability and Practical
Reason
, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.


Church, A., 1936, ‘A Bibliography of Symbolic Logic’,

Journal of Symbolic Logic
, 1(4): 121–216.


Dahms, H-J., 2001/2004, ‘Neue Sachlichkeit in der
Architektur und Philosophie der zwanziger Jahre’,

Zeitschrift fuer Architektur und Staedtebau
, Mai 2001,
82–7, translated as ‘
Neue Sachlichkeit
 in the
Architecture and Philosophy of the 20s’, in S. Awodey and C.
Klein, eds., 2004, 
Carnap Brought Home: The View from Jena
,
Chicago: Open Court, 357–75.


Duhem, P., 1906, 
La Théorie Physique: Son Objet et sa
Structure
, Paris: Vrin.


Faludi, A., 1989, ‘Planning According to the
‘Scientific Conception of the World’: the Work of Otto
Neurath’, 
Environment and Planning D: Society and
Space
, 7: 397–418.


Fechner, G, 1860, 
Elemente der Psychophysik
, 2 vols.,
Leipzig: Breitkopf and Hartl.


Feyerabend, P.K., 1975, 
Against Method: Outline of an
Anarchistic Theory of Knowledge
, London: Verso.


Friedman, M., 1999, 
Reconsidering Logical Positivism
, New
York: Cambridge University Press.


Galison, P., 1990, ‘Aufbau/Bauhaus: Logical Positivism and
Architectural Modernism’, 
Critical Inquiry
, 16:
709–52.


–––, 1996, ‘Constructing Modernism: The
Cultural Location of 
Aufbau
’, in R.N. Giere and A.W.
Richardson (eds.), 
Origins of Logical Empiricism
, Minnesota
Studies in the Philosophy of Science VXI, Minneapolis: University of
Minnesota Press, 17–44.


Gattei, S., 2004, ‘Karl Popper’s Philosophical
Breakthrough’, 
Philosophy of Science
, 71:
448–466.


Grierson, J., 1939, ‘Searchlight on Democracy’,

Documentary Newsletter
, December 1939; reprinted in Forsyth
Hardy (ed.), 
Grierson on Documentary
, London: Faber &
Faber: 227–237.


–––, 1941, 
Education and the New Order
,
Toronto: Canadian Association for Adult Education


Grimmer-Solem, E., 2003, 
Economics and Social Reform in
Germany 1864–1894
, Oxford: Oxford University Press.


Groß, A., 2019, ‘Generating Cognitive Tools:
Neurath’s Educational Ideal and the Concept of Isotype’,
in Cat and Tuboly (eds.) 2019, 177–96.


Hacohen, M., 2000, 
Karl Popper. The Formative Years,
1902–1945
, New York: Cambridge University Press.


Hahn, O., 1909, ‘Zur Axiomatik des logischen
Gebietkalkuls’, 
Archiv für systematische
Philosophie
 15, 345–7; English translation in Cat and
Tuboly (eds.) 2019, 507–9.


–––, 1910,‘Über die Koeffizienten
einer logischen Gleichung und ihre Beziehung zur Lehre von den
Schlüssen’, 
Archiv für systematische
Philosophie
, 16: 149–176.


Haller, R., 1982, ‘The Neurath Principle: Its Grounds and
Consequences’, in Uebel 1991, 117–30.


Hardcastle, G., 2007, ‘Logical Empiricism and the Philosophy
of Psychology’, in Richardson and Uebel, eds., 2007,
228–249.


Hayek, F.A. von, ed., 1935, 
Collectivist Economic Planning.
Critical Studies on the Possibilities of Socialism
, London:
Routledge.


Henning, M. 2019, ‘Of Tennis Courts and Fireplaces:
Neurath’s Internment on the Isle of Man and his Politics of
Design’, in Cat and Tuboly (eds.) 2019, 413–34.


Humphrey, G., 1951, 
Thinking
, London: Methuen and
Co.


Janik, A. and S. Toulmin, 1973, 
Wittgenstein’s
Vienna
, New York: Simon and Schuster.


Kaempffert, W., 1938, ‘Towards Bridging the Gaps Between the
Sciences’, 
New York Times Book Review
, August 7, 1938,
pp. 2, 18.


–––, 1939, ‘The Facts March On—with
Neurath’, 
Survey Graphic
, 28 (September 1939):
538–40.


Kinross, R., 1990, ‘Emigré Graphic Designers in
Britain: Around the Second World War and Afterwards’, J. of

Design History
, 3(1): 35–57.


Körber, S., ‘Thinking about the “Common
Reader”: Otto Neurath, L. Susan Stebbing and the (Modern)
Picture-Text Style’, in Cat and Tuboly (eds.) 2019, 451-70.


Kramer, R., 1988, 
Maria Montessori: A Biography
, Boulder:
Westview Press.


Kraeutler, H., 2008, 
Otto Neurath. Museum and Exhibition
Work
, Frankfurt: Peter Lang.


Kripke, S., 1989, 
Wittgenstein on Rules and Private
Language
, Oxford: Blackwell.


Lavoie, D., 1985, 
Rivalry and Central Planning. The Socialist
Calculation Debate Reconsidered
, Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.


Lewis, C.I., 1918, 
A Survey of Symbolic Logic
, Berkeley:
University of California Press.


Lindenfeld, D., 1997, 
The Practical Imagination. The German
Sciences of State in the Nineteenth Century
, Chicago: Chicago
University Press.


Low, R., 1979, 
The History of the British Film 1929–1939.
Documentary and Educational Films of the 1930s
, London: Allen and
Unwin.


Lupton, E., 1986, ‘Reading Isotype’, 
Design
Issues
, 3(2): 47–58.


Martínez-Alier, J., 1987, 
Ecological Economics.


Energy, Environment and Society
, Oxford: Basil
Blackwell.


Marx, K., 1887/1973, 
Capital
, Volume 1, New York: Free
Press.


Mises, L. von, 1920/1935, ‘Economic Calculation in the
Socialist Commonwealth’, in Hayek 1935.


–––, 1922/1981, 
Socialism, an Economic and
Sociological Analysis
, Indianapolis: Liberty Fund.


Mooslechner, P., 2008, ‘Neurath on Money: Some Reflections
on Neurath’s Monetary Thought in the Context of the Birth of
Modern Monetary Economics, in Nemeth, E., S.W. Schmitz and T.E. Uebel,
eds., 2008, 101–114.


Mormann, T., 1999, ‘Neurath’s Opposition to Tarskian
Semantics’, in J. Woleński and E. Köhler (eds.) 1999,

Alfred Tarski and the Vienna Circle
, Dordrecht: Springer,
165–78.


Morris, Ch., 1938, ‘Foundations of the Theory of
Signs’, 
International Encyclopedia of Unified Science
,
R. Carnap, Ch. Morris, and O. Neurath (eds.), Volumes 1 and 2,
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.


–––, 1960, ‘On the History of the
International Encyclopaedia of Unified Science’

Synthese
, 12: 517–21.


Müller, K.H.,1991, ‘Neurath’s Theory of
Pictorial-Statistical Representation’, in Uebel (ed.) 1991,
223–51.


Nemeth 1991, ‘The Unity of Planned Economy and the Unity of
Science’, in Uebel 1991, 275–84.


–––, 2007, ‘Logical Empiricism and the
History and Sociology of Science’, in Richardson and Uebel
(eds.) 2007, 278–304.


–––, 2019, ‘Visualizing Relations in
Society and Economics: Otto Neurath’s Isotype-Method Against the
Background of his Economic Thought’, in Cat and Tuboly (eds.)
2019, 117–40.


Nemmeth, E. and F. Stadler, eds., 1996, 
Encyclopedia and
Utopia. The Life and Work of Otto Neurath (1882–1945)
,
Dordrecht: Kluwer.


Nemeth, E. and R. Heinrich, eds., 1999, 
Otto Neurath:
Rationalität, Planung, Vielfalt
, Vienna: Olderbourg.


Nemeth, E., S.W. Schmitz and T.E. Uebel, eds., 2008, 
Otto
Neurath’s Economics in Context
, Cham: Springer.


Neurath, M., 1974, ‘ISOTYPE’, 
Instructional
Science
, 3: 127–50.


O’Neill, J., 1993, 
Ecology, Policy and Politics. Human
Well-being and the Natural World
, London: Routledge.


–––, 1995, ‘In Praise of a
Positivist’, in 
Radical Philosophy
, 74:
29–58.


–––, 1998, 
The Market. Ethics, Knowledge and
Politics
, London: Routledge.


–––, 2002, ‘Socialist Calculation and
Environmental Valuation: Money, Market and Ecology’, 
Science
and Society
, 66: 137–151.


–––, 2008, ‘Pluralism and Economic
Institutions’, in Uebel 2008: 77–100.


Oakes, G., 1988, 
Weber and Rickert. Concept Formation in the
Cultural Sciences
, Cambridge: MIT Press.


Peckhaus, V., 2012, ‘The Reception of Leibniz’s Logic
in 19th Century German Philosophy’, in R. Krömer and Y.
Chin-Drian, eds., 2012, 
New essays on Leibniz Reception
,
Basel: Springer.


Peters, M. A., 2001, ‘Philosophy as Pedagogy:
Wittgenstein’s Style of Thinking’ 
Radical
Pedagogy
, 3(3),
 [
Peters 2001 available online
].


Poincaré, H., 1906, 
Wissenschaft und Hypothese
,
Leipzig: Teubner. German translation of 
La Science et
l’Hypothèse
, Paris: Flammarion.


Polanyi, Michael, 1958, 
Personal Knowledge
, Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.


Popper, K.R., 1935/1951, 
Logic of Scientific Discovery
,
London: Allen and Unwin.


–––, 1950, 
The Open Society and its
Enemies
, Princeton: Princeton University Press.


–––, 1957, 
The Poverty of Historicism
,
Boston: Beacon Press.


Popper-Lynkeus, J., 1912, 
Die allgemeine Nährpflicht als
Lösung der Sozialen Frage
, Dresden: Reisner.


Potochnik, A. and A. Yap, 2006, ‘Revisiting Galison’s
‘Aufbau/Bauhaus’ in light of Neurath’s Philosophical
Projects’, 
Stud. Hist. Phil. Sci.
, 37:
469–488.


Reichenbach, H, 1931/1959, 
Modern Philosophy of Science
,
London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.


Reisch, G.,1994, ‘Planning Science: Otto Neurath and the
International Encyclopedia of Unified Science’, 
British
Journal for the Philosophy of Science
, 27: 153–75.


–––, 2005, 
How the Cold War Transformed
Philosophy of Science. To the Icy Slopes of Logic
, Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.


–––, 2019, ‘What a Difference a Decade
Makes: The Planning Debates and the Fate of the Unity of Science
Movement’, in Cat and Tuboly (eds.) 2019, 385–412.


Richardson, A.W. and T.E. Uebel (eds.), 2007, 
The Cambridge
Companion to Logical Empiricism
, New York: Cambridge University
Press.


Rotha, P., 1936, 
Documentary Film
, London: Faber and
Faber.


Sandner, G., 2008, ‘Economy, Ideology and Culture: Otto
Neurath’s Approach to a Precarious Relationship’, in
Nemeth, E., S.W. Schmitz and T.E. Uebel (eds.) 2008,
141–57.


Sandner, G., 2014, 
Otto Neurath. Eine politische
Biographie
, Vienna: Paul Zsolnay.


Schlick, M., 1918, 
Allgemeine Erkenntnislehre
, Berlin:
Springer.


–––, 1934/1979, ‘The Foundation of
Knowledge’, in M. Schlick, 
Philosophical Papers Vol. II
(1925–1936)
, H. L. Mulder and B. van de Velde-Schlick
(eds.), Dordrecht: Reidel.


Soulez, A. (ed.), 1997, 
Otto Neurath, un Philosophe entre
Science et Guerre
, Paris: Harmattan.


Stadler, F., 2001, 
The Vienna Circle. Studies in the Origins,
Development, and Influence of Logical Empiricism
, Dordrecht:
Springer.


–––, 2007, The Vienna Circle: Context, Profile
and Development´, in Richardson and Uebel 2007,
13–40.


Steele, D., 1999, 
From Max to Mises. Post-capitalist Society
and the Challenge of Economic Calculation
, Lasalle, IL: Open
Court.


Symons, J., O. Pombo and J.M. Torres, eds., 2011, 
Otto Neurath
and the Unity of Science
, New York: Springer.


ter Hark, M., 2002, ‘Between Autobiography and Reality:
Popper’s Inductive Years’, 
Stud. Hist. Phil.
Sci.
, 33: 79–103.


Tönnies, F., 1899–1900, ‘Philosophical
Terminology’, 
Mind
, 8: 289–332, 467–91, and
9, 46–61.


Tribe, K., 1995, 
Strategies of Economic Order.
 
German
Economic Discourse, 1750–1950
, Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.


Tuboly, A.T., 2019, ‘United by Action: Neurath in
England’, in Cat and Tuboly, eds., 2019, 89–116.


Turk, M., 2018, 
Otto Neurath and the History of
Economics
, New York: Routledge.


Uebel, T.E., ed., 1991, 
Rediscovering the Forgotten Vienna
Circle
, Dordrecht: Kluwer.


–––, 1992, 
Overcoming Logical Positivism
From Within. The Emergence of Neurath’s Naturalism in the Vienna
Circle’s Protocol Sentence Debate
, Amsterdam: Rodopi.


–––, 1995a, ‘Otto Neurath’s
Idealistic Inheritance: The Social and Economic Thought of Wilhelm
Neurath’, 
Synthese
, 103: 87–121.


–––, 1995b, ‘Wittgenstein and the Vienna
Circle’, K. Gavroglu, et al., eds., 
Physics, Philosophy and
the Scientific Community
, Dordrecht: Kluwer.


–––, 1998, ‘Enlightenment and the Vienna
Circle’s Scientific World-Conception’, in A.E. Rorty
(ed.), 
Philosophers on Education. Historical Perspectives
,
London: Routledge.


–––, 2004, ‘Preface’, in Neurath
2004.


–––, 2007, ‘Philosophy of Social Science
in Early Logical Empiricism’, in Richardson and Uebel 2007,
250–77.


–––, 2007, 
Empiricism at the Crossroads: The
Vienna Circle’s Procol-Sentence Debate
, Chicago and
LaSalle, IL: Open Court.


–––, 2008, ‘Otto Neurath as an Austrian
Economist: Behind the Scenes of the Early Socialist Calculation
Debate’, in E. Nemeth, S.W. Schmitz and T.E. Uebel (eds.) 2008,
37–60.


–––, 2019, ‘Rationality and
Pseudo-Rationality in Political Economy: Neurath, Mises, Weber’,
in Cat and Tuboly (eds.) 2019, 197–216.


Vaughn K., 1994, ‘The Socialist Calculation Debate’,
P., Boettke, ed., 
The Elgar Companion to Austrian Economics
,
Aldershot: Elgar, 478–84.


Vossoughian, N, 2008, 
The Language of the Global Polis
,
NAi Publishers.


Weber, M., 1921, 
Gesammelte politische Schriften
,
München: Drei Masken.


Weybright, W., 1936, ‘Social Showman’, 
Survey
Graphic
, 25(11): 618–9.


Wussow, Ph. von, 2021, ‘The Political Ideas of Otto Neurath.
Science, Judaism, and the Rise of Expertocracy’,

Azimuth
 IX(18): 61–86.


Zemplen, G.A., 2006, ‘The Development of the Neurath
Principle: Unearthing the Romantic Link’, 
Studies in History
and Philosophy Science
, 37: 585–609.


Zolo, D., 1990, 
Reflexive Epistemology and Social Complexity.
The Philosophical Legacy of Otto Neurath
, Dordrecht: Kluwer.








Academic Tools










How to cite this entry
.








Preview the PDF version of this entry
 at the
 
Friends of the SEP Society
.








Look up topics and thinkers related to this entry

 at the Internet Philosophy Ontology Project (InPhO).








Enhanced bibliography for this entry

at 
PhilPapers
, with links to its database.












Other Internet Resources




Institute Vienna Circle


Typography and Graphic Communication Collections and Archives
,
 at the University of Reading








Related Entries




Carnap, Rudolf
 |
 
ecology
 |
 
economics: philosophy of
 |
 
film, philosophy of
 |
 
Marx, Karl
 |
 
naturalism
 |
 
physicalism
 |
 
rationalism vs. empiricism
 |
 
science: unity of
 |
 
socialism
 |
 
Vienna Circle










 






Copyright © 2024
 by



Jordi Cat
<
jcat
@
indiana
.
edu
>
    




 









  Open access to the SEP is made possible by a world-wide funding initiative.

  Please Read How You Can Help Support the Growth and Development of the Encyclopedia




 

