











 
 Entry Navigation 






Entry Contents


Bibliography


Academic Tools


Friends PDF Preview 


Author and Citation Info 
 


Back to Top 


























Michael Oakeshott
First published Tue Mar 8, 2016; substantive revision Thu Feb 1, 2024





Michael Oakeshott (1901–1990) is often called a conservative
thinker. But this label identifies only one aspect of his thought and
invites misunderstanding because it is ambiguous. His ideas spring
from a lifetime of reading in the literature of European thought,
sharpened by philosophical reflection on its arguments and
presuppositions. Oakeshott worked on the premise that philosophical
questions are interconnected and that answering them requires
wide-ranging critical investigation. A recurrent theme in his writings
on moral and political life is the tension between individuality,
which implies plurality, and its denial, which he calls barbarism.
Individual freedom is threatened when politics is conceived as
imposing a collective purpose. The recent interest of political
philosophers in the republican idea of freedom as independence or
nondomination suggests the continuing relevance of his thought. So
does their interest in political realism as an alternative to
moralism. But Oakeshott’s contribution to philosophy is not
limited to political philosophy. It includes reflection on the
criteria for distinguishing different modes of thought, defining
historical inquiry as one such mode, identifying different conceptions
of rationality and their place in practical judgment, and
distinguishing competing understandings of the modern state. Oakeshott
also wrote on religion, morals, education, aesthetics, Hobbes, and the
history of political thought. But instead of surveying these topics,
this entry will focus on his most important contributions to
philosophy: his theory of modes, his criticism of rationalism, his
argument that the key distinction in modern politics concerns the
character and purpose of the state, and his philosophy of history.








1. Life and Works


2. Modes of Experience


3. Rationality and Rationalism


4. Civil Association


5. History and the Human Sciences


Bibliography




Works by Oakeshott


Other Works






Academic Tools


Other Internet Resources


Related Entries










1. Life and Works



Michael Oakeshott’s father, Joseph Oakeshott, was a member of
the Fabian Society, a socialist but not radical organization (its
symbol was the tortoise), many of whose members participated in
establishing the British Labor Party. The Society’s leaders,
Beatrice and Sidney Webb, were among the founders of the London School
of Economics. The younger Oakeshott studied history at Gonville and
Caius College, Cambridge, in the early 1920s and became a life fellow
in 1925. After serving in the British Army between 1940 and 1945, he
returned to Cambridge, then taught briefly at Nuffield College,
Oxford, before becoming Professor of Political Science at the LSE in
1951. At some point during his years at the LSE he launched an annual
course of lectures in the history of political thought. Focused
initially on canonical authors and texts, after the fashion of the
lectures he delivered at Harvard in 1958 (Oakeshott 1993b), the course
gradually became a more comprehensive examination of the political
experience and thought of four peoples: the ancient Greeks, the
Romans, medieval Christians, and modern Europeans (Oakeshott 2006). He
also led a seminar in the history of political thought for
postgraduate students and, as an emeritus professor, was active in it
until 1980, contributing papers on the historical study of political
thought and the philosophy of history. Brief accounts of
Oakeshott’s life can be found in two memorial collections
(Norman 1993; Marsh 2001) and a biographical essay (Grant 2012). The
notebooks Oakeshott kept for much of his life (Oakeshott 2014) offer
additional insights, as do his unpublished letters.



Although Oakeshott criticized the postwar Labor government’s
belief in planning, in his youth he thought of himself as a socialist.
But his was a romantic socialism concerned with spiritual
transformation, not economic redistribution. And though he repudiated
Fabianism, Marxism, and other left-wing ideologies, the mature
Oakeshott still sympathized with the anarchism of Pierre-Joseph
Proudhon, sharing the latter’s vision of a liberal order
combining community and equality with individuality and independence
(L. O’Sullivan 2014). His reputation as a conservative thinker
was substantially shaped by his trenchant essays on the limits of
reason in political life, collected as 
Rationalism in Politics and
Other Essays
 (cited hereafter as 
RP
). On the basis of
these essays he has been compared to a host of conservative figures
from Burke to Wittgenstein. Others argue that he is better
characterized as a liberal. As a theorist of the rule of law, he
invites comparison with Friedrich Hayek and Carl Schmitt. But efforts
to label Oakeshott as either conservative or liberal founder not only
on the ambiguities of those terms but on the partisanship they imply:
Oakeshott was emphatically not politically engaged. As he teased those
attending the twentieth-anniversary celebration of the 
National
Review
 in 1975, the Right’s differences with the Left were
a petty squabble over how the spoils of the state as a corporate
enterprise should be distributed (
RP
 459). To grasp the
philosophical significance of Oakeshott’s thought one must move
beyond the vocabulary of twentieth-century political dispute.



In his first book, 
Experience and Its Modes
 (1933, cited as

EM
), Oakeshott barely mentions politics. But this does not
mean that he was not interested in political philosophy when he wrote
it. The book grew out of his Cambridge lectures from the late 1920s,
“The Philosophical Approach to Politics”, now included in

Early Political Writings
 (Oakeshott 2010). In these lectures
he distinguishes different ways of thinking about politics, but in the
book these are detached from the subject of politics and presented as
general categories of human experience. By the time he wrote

Experience and Its Modes
, Oakeshott had come to believe that
political philosophy was necessarily defective—that it was
limited by its commitment to a pre-philosophically demarcated sphere
of experience and therefore not genuine philosophy. The book is a
highly individual performance in the style of British philosophical
Idealism, written at a time when that approach to philosophy was
rapidly going out of fashion. In it, Oakeshott credits the influence
of Hegel, Bradley, and Bosanquet, but it was evident that he had
absorbed their views “into an insistent literary personality
which moved freely and suggestively in many types of literature”
(Cowling 2003: 256). When Oakeshott took up politics again in the late
1930’s, it was in relation to the controversies of the day. At
the urging of the Cambridge political scientist Ernest Barker, and
partly motivated by the hope it would gain him a professorship, he
compiled an anthology of texts expounding the “doctrines”
of contemporary Europe: Representative Democracy, Catholicism,
Communism, Fascism, and National Socialism (Oakeshott 1939). His first
postwar publication was an edition of Hobbes’s

Leviathan
, with an influential introduction later published
together with other essays on Hobbes in 
Hobbes on Civil
Association
 (Oakeshott 1975b). In 1947 he founded the

Cambridge Journal
, a short-lived but critically esteemed
vehicle treating politics and culture as topics for civilized
conversation rather than ideological polemics or academic research.
Several of the essays reprinted in 
Rationalism in Politics

first appeared there.



Oakeshott’s magnum opus, 
On Human Conduct
 (1975a, cited
as 
OHC
) appeared late in his career. It was greeted in some
quarters with incomprehension and in others with hostility, but mostly
with silence. Even those who judged the book important found its style
forbidding, and its impact has been muted. Also difficult are the
three late essays on the philosophy of history included in 
On
History and Other Essays
 (1983, cited as 
OH
). His essays
on the idea of liberal education and its practical implications,
collected in 
The Voice of Liberal Learning
 (1989, cited as

VLL
), are more accessible and continue to receive attention
(Williams 2007; Backhurst and Fairfield 2016). After Oakeshott’s
death other writings appeared, first in a series of volumes published
by Yale University Press (Oakeshott 1993a, 1993b, and 1996) and then
in a series from Imprint Academic (Oakeshott 2004, 2006, 2007, 2008,
2010, and 2014). There has also been a steady stream of secondary
works, including two companion volumes (Franco and Marsh 2012;
Podoksik 2012). Comparison with philosophical
contemporaries—Collingwood, Wittgenstein, Schmitt, Strauss,
Hayek, Gadamer, Arendt, Foucault, MacIntyre—offers another angle
from which to view his contribution (Dyzenhaus and Poole 2015; Plotica
2015; N. O’Sullivan 2017). This literature, together with the
careful attention his less accessible writings are starting to receive
(Thompson 2019; Kos 2022), suggests that Oakeshott occupies a secure
place in the history of philosophy and political thought.


2. Modes of Experience



Philosophers have used the word “mode” to refer to an
attribute that a thing can possess or the form a substance can take.
For Oakeshott, this thing or substance is “experience”, by
which he means both the activity of experiencing and what is
experienced, understood as inseparable and therefore as a unity.
Looked at from either side, experience involves thinking and therefore
ideas. He has in mind the kind of mutually correlated subject-object
relationship that Hegel examines in the 
Phenomenology
 (which
Oakeshott read in his 20s), according to which what is
experienced—the object—is itself thought. Where a body of
ideas has achieved a substantial degree of integrity and
differentiation, a mode of thought can be said to have emerged.
Philosophers sometimes understand a mode to be an aspect of something
larger or more real than itself (Descartes 1641: 27–28, 31). In

Experience and Its Modes
 there are traces of the view, also
discernible in Spinoza and Hegel, that this “larger thing”
is everything that exists, the sum total of experience identified as
God or the Absolute. Oakeshott does not use the word
“mode” in later writings in a way that implies a universal
or ultimate reality. But neither is a mode of thought just any kind of
thinking. It is an “autonomous” kind of thinking, one that
is “specifiable in terms of exact conditions” and
“logically incapable of denying or confirming the conclusions of
any other mode” (
OH
 2). A mode constitutes a distinct
and self-consistent “whole of interlocking meanings”
(
VLL
 38), a world of ideas resting on its own criteria of
truth, factuality, and reality. A puzzle, then, is how the modes can
talk to one another, and the solution is that as modes they actually
don’t. There is a difference between modes as ideal types and
their instantiation in particular thoughts and actions, and therefore
between philosophically differentiating modes and investigating them
historically or sociologically.



The kind of thinking that is involved in acting is one such mode,
which Oakeshott calls “practice”. Another is
“history”, by which he means neither “the notional
grand total of all that has ever happened” nor some part of it,
whose makers are the participants in the occurrences that constitute
it, but rather a distinct kind of inquiry into and understanding of
events. Because events are not given but must be inferred from what
the historian treats as evidence, history in this sense is made by the
historian (
OH
 1–2). It is, moreover, an inquiry that
aims to account for past events as intelligible outcomes of antecedent
events. In contrast to history, understood in this way,
“science” as a mode is defined by its search for
regularities that can account for the occurrence of repeatable events
and for ways to express these regularities as relationships between
quantities. This way of distinguishing between history and science
locates Oakeshott in the tradition of German Neo-Kantian of the
previous generation, Wilhelm Windelband and Heinrich Rickert
especially, in which the 
Naturwissenschaften
 and

Geisteswissenschaften
 were treated as distinct
epistemological forms. History and science are both inherently
explanatory, but the kinds of explanations they provide are different.
Genuine history is also distinguished from ideas about the past that
are shaped by current practical concerns. The same holds for science:
as a mode of inquiry, science differs from the practical application
of scientific knowledge. From this perspective, we might see
engineering as a practical discipline rather than a scientific
one.



Modes, then, are distinct and provisionally coherent kinds of
knowledge. In 
Experience and Its Modes
, Oakeshott aims to
identify the presuppositions in terms of which a mode can be made
coherent and distinguished from other modes. A modal distinction is
“categorial”—a distinction of kind rather than
degree. Philosophers have disagreed about whether the identified kinds
are natural (ontological) or conceptual (epistemological): categories
of being (Aristotle) or categories of understanding (Kant).
Philosophers also disagree about whether a categorial scheme must be
exhaustive and fixed or, alternatively, can be open and mutable (L.
O’Sullivan 2024). The modes that Oakeshott identifies in

Experience and Its Modes
—history, science, and
practice, to which he later added “poetry” (aesthetic
experience)—can from one angle be seen as epistemological
categories, not ontological ones. But from another angle the
distinction between being and knowing does not make sense. There can
be no absolute difference between what a thing is and how it is
conceived in a particular context because there is no “thing in
itself” that is independent of thought. And though the modes he
identifies are mutually exclusive, Oakeshott does not think that they
form a closed set. They are intellectual constructions that have
emerged in the course of human experience. This suggests that they
could change or even disappear, and that new modes might appear. But
here we must distinguish between a mode and its instantiation. History
was a possible form of thinking before anyone started to think
historically and would remain a possibility even if human beings were
to cease thinking historically.



A number of other conclusions follow from this understanding of
modality. First, a mode of experience implies a distinct and
autonomous kind of understanding. It implies a universe of discourse
with its own arguments and ways of assessing and grounding them.
Because propositions in one mode of discourse have no standing in
another, truth is coherence, however defined, within a given mode. To
argue across a modal boundary is to commit the fallacy of

ignoratio elenchi
 (irrelevance). If there is any relationship
between modes it is conversational, not argumentative: cross-modal
encounters yield differences, not supra-modal conclusions. Oakeshott
sometimes makes this point by speaking of modes as
“voices” in an inter-modal conversation (
RP

488–491, 497). In conversation rules of relevance are relaxed: a
conversation is not an argument. Second, because what counts as
rational in discourse depends on the mode of discourse itself, there
is no extra-modal definition of rationality. The illusion that there
is arises from privileging what counts as reasonable within a given
mode and denigrating what is considered reasonable in other modes.
This illusion of superiority generates the narrowness, and at times
hubris, characteristic of each mode connoted by the appellations
“historicism”, “scientism”,
“pragmatism”, and “aestheticism”. A
conversational as opposed to argumentative juxtaposition of modal
voices is respectful of differences and for that reason inherently
civilized, which means that to insist on the primacy of any single
mode is not only boorish but barbaric. And because the modes are
independent of one another, and none is more expressive of an imagined
mode-independent reality than any other, there can be no hierarchy of
modes.



In making these points, Oakeshott differs from philosophical Idealists
in Germany, Italy, and England who were proposing similar categorial
schemes around the same time. These include Benedetto Croce, who
distinguishes the theoretical modes of art, history, and philosophy
from the practical modes of economics and ethics, and R.G.
Collingwood, who in 
Speculum Mentis
, an early work, begins
with Hegel’s triad of art, religion, and philosophy, identifying
philosophy broadly defined with “knowledge” and
distinguishing three kinds of knowledge—science, history, and
philosophy narrowly defined—to generate a fivefold hierarchy of
modes. In Collingwood’s scheme, art is at the bottom, followed
by religion, the former concerned to imagine or “suppose”
and the latter to “assert”, and then by the three kinds of
genuine knowledge, which are distinguished from art and religion in
being critical. Philosophy is the most critical of all because it aims
to transcend the other forms (Collingwood 1924). Oakeshott, partly in
response to Collingwood, folds art and religion into practice, denies
that modes can be ordered hierarchically, and defines philosophy as
the activity of interrogating presuppositions, including its own, and
therefore not itself a mode. But despite characterizing philosophy as
supramodal, he severs the tie between philosophy and unqualified
knowledge—“the Absolute”—that one finds in
Idealist metaphysics from Hegel to Collingwood. The distinction
between modal thinking and philosophy that Oakeshott asserts in

Experience and Its Modes
 reappears in 
On Human
Conduct
 as a distinction between “conditional” and
“unconditional” theorizing, the former resting on
assumptions that the latter questions.



The idea of a hierarchy of modes is not particular to Idealism. Where
there are different understandings, someone interested in reconciling
them might argue that they represent different levels of
understanding, some more inclusive and in that sense higher than
others. In contrast to unifying philosophies, including philosophical
Idealism, Oakeshott’s position is pluralist and
anti-hierarchical. In this respect he has more in common with Wilhelm
Dilthey, who struggled with the issue of relativity in metaphysics and
how to distinguish the human from the natural sciences, than with the
British Idealists—Bradley, Bosanquet, and McTaggart among
others—with whom he is often associated (Boucher 2012). For
Oakeshott, all knowledge is conditional. Theorizing is “an
engagement of arrivals and departures” in which “the
notion of an unconditional or definitive understanding may hover in
the background, but … has no part in the adventure”
(
OHC
 2–3). In attempting to construct a coherent view
of the world the philosopher “puts out to sea”
(
OHC
 40) and is perpetually 
en voyage
: there are no
“final solutions” in philosophy any more than in
politics.


3. Rationality and Rationalism



What Oakeshott calls “Rationalism” is the belief, in his
view illusory, that there are “correct” answers to
practical questions. It is the belief that an action or policy is
rational only when it rests on knowledge whose truth can be
demonstrated. Its error is thinking that correct decisions can be made
simply by applying rules or calculating consequences. In an early
essay, Oakeshott distinguishes between “technical” and
“traditional” knowledge. Technical knowledge is knowledge,
whether of facts or rules, that is easily learned and applied, even by
those who are without experience. Traditional knowledge, in contrast,
is “knowing how” rather than “knowing that”
(Ryle 1949). It is acquired by engaging in an activity and involves
judgment in handling facts or rules (
RP
 12–17).
Knowledge often involves an element of rule-following but using rules
skillfully or prudently means going beyond the instructions they
provide. Even a simple rule, like “no vehicles in the
park” (Hart 1958), implies an element of judgment, in this case
what counts as a vehicle. This holds for collective as well as
individual decisions and for political as well as private ones. But if
technical knowledge has limits, so does traditional knowledge. We
cannot conclude that experience and judgment are infallible: clearly,
they are not.



Political deliberation occurs when a public decision needs to be made
and a proposed course of action defended. But deciding which course of
action to pursue involves more than simply applying rules or
calculating costs and benefits. It requires interpretation and
judgment. We must decide which rule to use and then interpret what the
rule means in a given situation. If, alternatively, we choose an
action based on its likely consequences, we must assess the expected
value of those consequences, and this involves making value judgments
as well as estimating probabilities. Whether we are applying rules or
calculating outcomes, we must work with what we presume to be facts,
though these are always uncertain in various ways. For these reasons,
there is never a demonstrably correct course of action. Political
arguments cannot be proved or disproved; they can only be shown to be
more or less convincing than other such arguments. Political
discourse, then, is a discourse of contingencies and conjectures, not
of certainties or context-independent truths. It is persuasive and
rhetorical, not a matter of demonstration or proof (
RP

70–95).



These are familiar points, made by Oakeshott with particular clarity.
What he adds to other philosophical discussions of practical
reasoning, such as Aristotle’s treatment of 
techne
 and

phronēsis
 (
Nichomachean Ethics
 1142a) or
Kant’s remarks on judgment as the middle term between rules and
applications (Kant 1793: 8:275), are reflections on how practical, and
in particular political, discourse can cause disasters when these
points are overlooked. His conclusions rest on a dissection of
ideological politics, which, Oakeshott thought, reflects a
characteristically modern disposition to substitute rules for judgment
in practical reasoning. The rules that are thought to govern practice
are not independent of practical activity but abstracted from it. They
are “abridgments” of customs, habits, traditions, and
skills (
RP
 121). To borrow language from Michael Walzer, they
are interpretations rather than discoveries or inventions (Walzer
1987). And what they interpret are ways of doing things:





the pedigree of every political ideology shows it to be the creature,
not of premeditation in advance of political activity, but of
meditation upon a manner of politics. (
RP
 51)





Rationalists, unaware of the local origins of the universal principles
that they imagine they have identified, reject knowledge gained
through experience in favor of something they call reason or science.
Whether deductive or computational, this abstract reason is thought to
guarantee greater certainty than experience and judgment can provide.
The fallacy of Rationalism, in other words, is that the knowledge that
it identifies as rational is itself really a product of experience and
judgment. It consists of rules, methods, or techniques abstracted from
practice—tools that, far from being substitutes for experience
and judgment, cannot be effectively used in their absence.



In his essays on Rationalism, Oakeshott discusses many examples of
ideological politics. He dissects the rhetorical strategies of Locke,
Bentham, and Marx and takes contemporaries to task for thinking that
political conclusions can be extracted from religious or scientific
principles or from what are believed to be the lessons of history.
Marxism, for example, claims that laws of historical change can be
discerned scientifically and practical guidance derived from them. But
the claim should be understood as a rhetorical one that can persuade
only those who already believe it (Oakeshott 2008: 168–177). In
his 
Lectures in the History of Political Thought
 (Oakeshott
2006: 469–482) and 
On Human Conduct
 (
OHC

263–316), he discusses the arguments of Francis Bacon, the
German Cameralists, and others who impute some collective purpose to
the state as an enterprise for promoting some particular substantive
goal. This goal might be religious, economic, imperial, or
therapeutic. Bacon, for example, argues that the purpose of government
is to exploit nature, which implies mobilizing labor for the sake of
collective welfare—an implication explored and developed by
later thinkers, often but not only those identified as socialist. The
“collective” and “welfare” elements of this
understanding of the modern state, like the more general theme of
exploiting nature for human ends, have become ubiquitous. Oakeshott
examines seventeenth-century Puritanism, eighteenth-century
enlightened despotism, and twentieth-century fascism and communism,
all of which see the state as a corporate enterprise of some kind, as
instances of what he calls “telocracy” (or
“teleocracy”). In each case, the collective goal is tied
to an ideology that professes to offer guidance for how to achieve the
goal.



These explorations of ideological politics took Oakeshott in two
directions. One, discussed in Section 4 below, was to distinguish
alternative understandings of the modern European state, each of which
could appear as either an analytical concept or an ideology. The other
was to affirm the independence of explanatory theorizing from
practical engagement by questioning the commonly affirmed “unity
of theory and practice”—an argument, discernible in
Heidegger and Gadamer, American pragmatism, and Frankfurt School
critical theory, for the practical character of all knowledge (Neill
2013). Heidegger treats practical experience not as one mode of
understanding among others but as the primordial experience from which
nothing human can free itself. For pragmatists and critical theorists,
thinking is shaped by the practical concerns that motivate it. And
those who offer practical guidance under the label of normative or
applied ethics hold that moral philosophy aims primarily to guide or
judge conduct and only secondarily and instrumentally to understand
it. They make a similar point about political philosophy. Remarkably,
in the study of political thought the rejection of unhistorical
story-telling by “Cambridge School” scholars has given way
to a renewed conviction of the practical and ideological character of
historical investigation evident in the work of many historians of
political thought not usually considered to be critical theorists in
the Frankfurt School sense (Thompson 2019).



Oakeshott repeatedly challenges the argument that political philosophy
is inherently and unavoidably practical. Not only is it possible to
distinguish political philosophy from its object, political activity,
but its claim to being philosophical demands that the distinction be
recognized. The same holds for ethics. In Oakeshott’s view,
moral philosophy properly so-called is theorizing about morality
(metaethics). It is concerned to understand and explain, not to
prescribe. Prescriptive or normative ethics, he argued early on, is
“pseudo-philosophy” (
EM
 331–346) because it
mixes theorizing with moralising. Just as a theory of jokes is not
itself a joke (
OHC
 10), a theory of morality is not itself a
morality. The object of theorizing is a “going-on” to be
reflected upon (“theorized”) by an observer (a
“theorist”) whose reflections may generate conclusions
(“theorems”), however provisional (Oakeshott 2004: 391;

OHC
 3). Theorizing is distinguished from what Oakeshott calls
“doing” in that the product of theorizing is an
understanding, a theorem or proposition, not, as in the case of doing,
an action. In doing, whatever reflection takes place involves
deliberating about what to do. The theorizing that distinguishes
genuine historical and scientific inquiry from pseudo-history or
pseudo-science is not action-oriented and prescriptive but
explanatory. What distinguishes philosophical from historical or
scientific inquiry is that philosophy is more critical in examining
the presuppositions of inquiry: where scientists or historians want to
get on with their work, the philosopher is concerned to problematize
that work and to examine the experience of thinking itself. Political
philosophy, then, is properly philosophical when it examines the
presuppositions of political activity.



An objection to distinguishing theory and practice in this way is that
it treats as categorial a distinction better understood as one of
degree. Political theory is messy. It involves describing and judging,
explaining and prescribing, and it is not always clear where one
begins and the other ends. They are certainly joined in
Oakeshott’s writings despite his arguments for keeping them
separate (Haddock 2005). But the objection affirms rather than denies
the distinction. This is not to say that it cannot be challenged, but
to push the discussion further we must rethink the terms involved, for
example by defining practical reasoning as reasoning that results in
changes in 
belief
 as well as action (Wallace 2020).
Alternatively, we might treat the theory-practice distinction as
contextual: as Knud Haakonssen has suggested, a philosopher’s
theoretical argument can appear practical when read historically as a
move in some moral or political debate (Nardin 2015:
318–319).



The distinctive contribution of political philosophy, for Oakeshott,
is not to generate ideologies or recommend policies but to understand
political activity in terms of its assumptions. The knowledge it
generates, moreover, is always provisional. Because scientific or
historical knowledge is also provisional, this might seem to blur the
distinction between philosophy and other kinds of inquiry. But
philosophy is more relentless in questioning presuppositions: it is
inquiry





in which questions are asked not in order to be answered but so that
they may themselves be interrogated with respect to their conditions.
(
OHC
 11)





To embrace this activity, Oakeshott suggests in a characteristic
metaphor, is to escape the prison of one’s current
understanding. For the political philosopher, it means leaving
politics behind to pursue more basic concerns. This is not intended as
a description of what political philosophers do (they do many things),
nor is it a prescription for how they should proceed; it is the
product of Oakeshott’s reflections on his own experience in
moving from engaging political arguments to uncovering their
presuppositions.


4. Civil Association



For the study of politics to be truly philosophical, Oakeshott
thought, it must exchange the vocabulary of political activity for one
that explains politics in other terms. But this can lead to
misunderstanding because the vocabularies are not interchangeable. The
need to escape the shackles of an inherited political vocabulary
explains why, in 
On Human Conduct
 especially, Oakeshott
modifies that vocabulary to distinguish the kind of association he
calls “civil” from association to promote a substantive
purpose: “enterprise” association. If we apply the idea of
enterprise association to the state, we generate a conception of it as
a corporate undertaking. Civil association, in contrast, assumes the
absence of a superordinate collective purpose. The concept identifis a
kind of state whose laws leave citizens free to pursue their own
self-chosen purposes: a state premised on the independence of those
associated and therefore committed to resisting the domination that
occurs in private life when some impose their preferences on others
and in public affairs when the state itself is organized to impose a
collective purpose on everyone. Oakeshott’s Latinate
terminology—
civitas
 for state, 
cives
 for
citizens, 
lex
 for law, 
jus
 for the rightness of law,
and 
respublica
 for the common good—springs from his
wish to direct the reader away from the connotations of these
corresponding English words by using others less closely identified
with the concerns of enterprise association that pervade modern
politics and therefore modern political discourse. 
Civitas
 is
a mode of association in which 
cives
 are related to one
another as fellow subjects of common and nonistrumental laws.



An obvious objection is that a state needs instrumental as well as
noninstrumental laws; no state can function without issuing orders and
framing policies to secure compliance, raise revenue, defend itself
against enemies, and so forth. Oakeshott would not disagree. Any
actual state is a mixture of formal and substantive elements,
procedures and policies, civil and enterprise association. But
defining civil association does not mean identifying the features of
an actual state; it means identifying the “postulates” of
civil association as a mode of association. These are attributes of a
state that determine its civil character and distinguish it from
states in which that character is recessive or even suppressed.

Cives
 are united in their recognition of the authority of

lex
 and the obligations it prescribes. The law identified as

leges
 constrain citizens in the same way that Hobbes said
hedges constrain travelers: keeping them on the roads without
prescribing their destinations (
Leviathan
, ch. 30). To say
that the laws in a 
civitas
 are authoritative is to say that
their recognition as law is independent of whether 
cives

approve of the obligations they prescribe. Similarly, to consider the
desirability of a law in civil association is to engage in an activity
narrowly focused on the question of whether that law is an appropriate
expression of 
respublica
, conceived not as a substantive
good, interest, or purpose but as rules, procedures, and offices
governing the conduct of the associates (
OHC
 147–149):
this is the 
res publica
, the “public concern”,
which is the proper subject for political deliberation in civil
association. In an actual state, however, the public concern includes
substantive goods that follow from or are needed to sustain the rule
of law, for it is the rule of law that defines the civil condition.
These goods, as Kant and others have observed, might include policing,
roads, schools, hospitals, and social security (Ripstein 2009: chs. 8
and 9). Civil laws do not violate the premises of civil association
when they redress “public bads” such as poverty, epidemic
disease, or air pollution (de Jongh 2022). There is, in short, ample
room for welfare concerns within the civil condition, once the idea of
civil association is brought down to earth.



Oakeshott considers the implications of a “civil”
understanding of the modern state in many writings, but most
systematically in his essays “On the Civil Condition”
(
OHC
 Part II) and “The Rule of Law” (
OH

119–164). Underlying the theory of civil association that he
develops in these works is a distinction between two modes of human
relationship, one moral and the other prudential. Laws in the mode of
civil association, which is an idea abstracted from what might be
going on in an actual state, are “moral” in the sense that
they prescribe authoritative constraints on how individuals may go
about satisfying their wants, not instruments for achieving
substantive satisfactions. Unlike persons cooperating to satisfy
wants, those related morally (in this sense of the term) are related
on the basis of rules as rules: noninstrumental standards of conduct
whose authority is distinguished from their utility. One might
question Oakeshott’s use of the word “moral” without
disputing his suggestion that there is a distinction between the
propriety of an act as judged by its relationship to a rule and its
consequential desirability. A moral rule binds people regardless of
their purposes; it binds enemies as well as friends. As a moral
relationship, then, civil association unites people not as subjects
joined to pursue a common goal but as individuals pursuing goals of
their own, subject to the constraints of laws that are not the
instruments of some larger purpose.




Lex
 is what Oakeshott calls an “ideal character”,
an abstraction that is not to be confused with the actual law of any
existing state. To theorize civil association is not to describe the
contingent features of a particular state but to identify the
presuppositions of the state as an idea—a mode of association.
Having identified the modes of civil and enterprise association,
Oakeshott is able to distinguish the idea of a legal order organized
to advance a substantive purpose, one shaped by laws instrumental to
that end, from one in which the laws are noninstrumental constraints
on the choices of subjects pursuing their own purposes. Once we have
grasped the distinction, we can see why he identifies the rule of law
with civil association: differentiating the rule of law from other
kinds of legal rule is necessary to distinguish between laws premised
on the independence of citizens and laws designed to conscript them
for purposes not their own and thereby to dominate them. For
Oakeshott, the rule of law is a concept, not a description of any
existing legal order, much less (as it is for a less philosophical
thinker like Friedrich Hayek) a guiding ideal or ideology. In what has
been called “the ambiguity thesis” (Friedman 1989),
Oakeshott holds that any actual state—any existing legal
order—is mixture of noninstrumental rules regulating
interactions among citizens and rules instrumental to achieving
substantive purposes: an ambiguous combination of civil and enterprise
association.



There will, then, be enterprise elements even in states in which the
civil character predominates. An actual state must have, in addition
to rules of association, some way to recognize, alter, and apply those
rules. Civil association, in other words, requires legislative and
judicial institutions and an apparatus of “ruling”
(policing, licensing, conscripting, and the like). Such institutions
are needed to anchor the idea of civility in the real world. The
government of an actual state will occupy buildings, keep records, and
collect taxes. And as a necessary part of governing it will sometimes
pursue substantive policies, attempt to produce particular outcomes,
issue specific orders or commands, and concern itself not only with
classes of persons but with named individuals. These powers can be,
and often are, misused, but they must be available if the rule of law
is to be more than “a logician’s dream” (
OH

149). But there is a difference between the conceptual presuppositions
of civil association and the conditions for realizing it in the
circumstances of a particular state. In civil association the

persona
 of the legislator, judge, or administrator is defined
by the obligations of 
lex
. A legislator in this role is not
an advocate for policies. A judge is not an arbitrator between
interests, nor is an administrator the implementer of a collective
project. What is to be legislated, adjudicated, and implemented is
noninstrumental law, 
lex
, not policies to advance the
substantive purposes of a state conceived as a corporate enterprise.
In any actual state these roles—legislator and policymaker,
judge and arbitrator, ruler and manager—may not be sharply
distinguished. But in the mode of civil association, they are
distinct.



There is also a difference between the authority of a law and its
desirability: a legal order that its subjects disapprove of might have
difficulty sustaining itself. The difference is conceptual as well as
practical. Oakeshott joins legal positivists in distinguishing the
validity of a law as law (which he calls its
“authenticity”) from its desirability or justice (its
“rightness”). But as his vocabulary signals, there are
subtle distinctions that he finds important. In a civil association, a
law is authentic if it is the outcome of an authoritative procedure
for enacting or otherwise recognizing it as part of the legal order.
This leaves open questions about its utility, moral legitimacy,
conformity to some standard of fair distribution, or other qualities
that might bear on its desirability. For Oakeshott, the rightness of a
law (or as he puts it, the 
jus
 of 
lex
) is not a
matter of its consequences. He does not agree with John Rawls, Ronald
Dworkin, and other liberal egalitarians that the rightness of a law
(which they call justice) depends on whether it fairly distributes
benefits and burdens (
OH
 156). Nor does he agree that it
depends on criteria that Lon Fuller (1969) calls the “inner
morality” of law, which requires among other things that laws be
public, general, and not retroactive. These are qualities not of just
laws but of legality itself, Oakeshott argues. A law that is secret,
tailored to benefit or injure particular individuals, or designed to
punish acts performed before its enactment is a disguised command, not
a genuine legal rule (
OHC
 128). He also disagrees with those
who think that a law’s rightness depends on its conformity with
a higher law, whether divine or natural, with principles of human
rights, or with any other universal and categorical standard
(
OHC
 174; 
OH
 142).



Oakeshott is less clear about what justice or rightness in civil
association is than what it is not. He suggests that the most
important consideration in assessing a law’s rightness is
whether the obligations it prescribes are appropriately imposed, in
part because law is inherently coercive (
OHC
 160; 
OH

143). That an act is harmful, wrong, or otherwise undesirable is not
necessarily a decisive reason to forbid it legally. Whether a state
should constrain someone’s choices on such grounds depends on
what Oakeshott calls the moral-legal self-understanding of a community
(
OH
 160). If the criteria used in judging the justice of laws
are not already embedded in the way a community deliberates legal
changes, what is called justice becomes an arbitrary standard that can
undermine the rule of law. The defect here arises when we judge a
community’s laws according to abstract criteria unrelated to the
self-understandings of its members. Here again, Oakeshott’s view
resembles that of Michael Walzer, who argues that appropriate and
effective “social criticism” comes from those who are
experienced in the ways of the community they criticize: they are
“connected critics” who base their criticism on the
community’s own standards. They stand “a little to the
side, but not outside” the communities whose practices they
criticize (Walzer 1987: 61). The desirability of a law, then, must be
judged in relation to the practices of the community. These are not
univocal, however, and so the judgments are a matter for continuing
debate. Judging well requires a disciplined focus on the obligations a
state can properly prescribe. A law might be found wanting, for
example, if enforcing it were to require intrusive surveillance. The
character of deliberation in a state bearing the character of a civil
association is defined by its style more than by its conclusions in
particular cases (
OH
 161).



Oakeshott’s idea of civil association responds to a fundamental
question in political philosophy: how can the nonvoluntary character
of law be reconciled with individual freedom? And his answer, which
self-consciously restates conclusions reached by Rousseau, Kant, and
J.S. Mill, among others, is that law respects individual freedom only
when it is understood as limited to regulating the activities of
citizens pursuing their own ends. A legal order of this kind must
ensure adequate compliance with its laws, but coercion of that kind
should be distinguished from coercion designed to advance substantive
policies unrelated to maintaining a civil order. The state as a
framework of laws for the coexistence of free individuals becomes a
tyranny when law is used to impose the purposes of some on others who
do not share them. The legal subject in an enterprise state is not an
independent citizen but someone to be led, managed, mobilized, or
provided for: a subordinate assigned a role in a purposive project.
The dependent role-players in an enterprise state and the independent
individuals in a civil one are equally “free”, in one
sense of that word, because both have “agency”, the
capacity to choose even when their choices are constrained. But only
in civil association do those associated enjoy “individual
freedom”, which for Oakeshott means freedom from being legally
subjected to the purposes of others.



This is a version of the republican idea of freedom as independence or
nondomination (Skinner 1998; Pettit 1997), though for Oakeshott as for
Kant independence is defined in moral rather than material terms and
stripped of certain other elements of republican political thought,
such as that the people must make its own laws. Individual freedom,
which is distinct from the freedom inherent in agency, is not
compromised by law in civil association. One reason for this is that
in civil association, as a 
mode
 of association, laws are
general rules, not particular commands. The more nearly a state
resembles an enterprise association in practice, the less it can
accommodate activities “eccentric or indifferent to its
purpose” (
OHC
 316). Participating in a purposive
enterprise can express individuality only if participation is freely
chosen. The subjects of an enterprise state are not independent,
because the purposes they are compelled to serve have been chosen for
them. And although some may contingently escape servitude, whether
they are permitted to go (or for that matter to stay) is “a
management decision” (
OHC
 317). Because freedom in
enterprise association is the freedom to dissociate as well as to
associate, it can exist only if the association itself is voluntary,
and this cannot be assumed if the association is a state.



Oakeshott builds his account of civil association in 
On Human
Conduct
 on an exploration of its presuppositions. These include
the ideas of agency, agents, actions, transactions to satisfy wants,
instrumental and noninstrumental practices, and the conduct of agents
related in terms of such transactions and practices. And he explores
ideas about the modern state in European thought and practice, a
historical topic he also discusses in other writings (Oakeshott 1993b,
1996, 2006, 2008). He traces the distinction between civil and
enterprise association to the medieval ideas of 
societas
 and

universitas
, terms he borrows (and redefines) for his
purpose. 
Societas
 designates a relationship of agents in a
practice (such as a common language), agents





joined not in seeking a common substantive satisfaction, but in virtue
of their understanding and acknowledgement of the conditions of the
practice concerned and of the relationships it entails. (
OHC

88)





A 
universitas
, in contrast, is a corporate undertaking (such
as a partnership or school) established to advance a particular end.

Societas
 is not identical with civil association, however; it
stands for a larger class of relationships based on the
noninstrumental considerations that define them. The civil condition
emerges only when these considerations harden into rules
(“laws”) and are supplemented with other rules for
recognizing, altering, and enforcing them. Oakeshott examines
reflections on the modern state, so conceived, found in Machiavelli,
Madison, Constant, and Montesquieu, among others, and more
philosophically (that is, in terms of its presuppositions rather than
incidental features) in Bodin, Hobbes, Spinoza, Kant, Fichte, and
Hegel. He also examines the ideas of thinkers who saw the state as a
purposive enterprise. These include Francis Bacon, for whom the state
was a productive estate, Joseph de Maistre, who saw it as “a
religious corporation in the Catholic idiom” (
OHC
 281),
and various theorists of enlightened despotism, socialism, national
self-determination, and economic development. But Oakeshott’s
discussion of these thinkers and their arguments is only loosely
historical, inviting the charge that he is using them for his own
purposes and in a way that does not meet his own definition of
historical inquiry.


5. History and the Human Sciences



By distinguishing between thinking to understand and thinking to act,
Oakeshott aims to protect historical, scientific, and philosophical
inquiry from the imperialism of practical concerns. With respect to
historical inquiry, this aim is evident in his contrasting the idea of
a distinctively historical past with what he calls “the
practical past”. Genuine historical inquiry is concerned to
establish what happened, not to elicit knowledge that speaks to
present concerns. It is indifferent to “the lessons of
history” (
EM
 316) or “the living past”
(
OH
 19). This does not mean that past experience cannot guide
present conduct, but that the past that is supposed to guide is not a
“historical” past. Nor is it the business of historical
inquiry to ascertain the direction of history. Accounts of human
progress (Condorcet) or the end of history (Fukuyama) do not observe
the modal conditions of historical thought. They are exercises in what
Herbert Butterfield (1931) called “Whig
history”—stories designed to ratify, if not glorify, the
author’s own time. A similar point can be made about stories of
decline. By detaching historical knowledge from present concerns,
Oakeshott articulates a theory of history as a distinct and coherent
mode of inquiry and understanding.



Implicit in this claim for the autonomy of historical inquiry is a
distinction between naturalistic and hermeneutic ways of understanding
human affairs. To signal this distinction, Oakeshott uses the word
“conduct” to identify human choice and action, contrasting
it with “behavior” explained as the outcome of biochemical
or other natural processes. Unlike natural phenomena, human conduct
involves ideas. And unlike the natural sciences, the “human
sciences” (the sciences of mind or ideas,

Geisteswissenchaften
) require interpreting ideas. The human
sciences are, in fact, doubly interpretive because they interpret
human conduct, which is itself an activity that involves making and
acting on interpretations. Historical explanation emerges as a
distinct idiom within the human sciences when we go from generalizing
about human conduct to explaining particular acts.



In making these points Oakeshott draws on late nineteenth- and early
twentieth-century German thinking about the study of history,
especially the anti-positivism of Windelband, Rickert, and Dilthey.
Their arguments rest on a distinction between the realms of human
freedom and natural necessity articulated by Vico, Kant, and Hegel,
among others. Understanding human conduct in terms of thought and
action can nevertheless be scientific—that is,
systematic—in its own way. Such an inquiry might focus on what
Hegel called “objective spirit”, shared ideas expressed in
languages, moral traditions, and other practices that require
interpretation. But it might also concern itself with individual
performances: with particular acts, judgments, and arguments. In
either case, the disciplines of the humanities and the humanistic
social sciences are concerned with the content of
thinking—ideas—not the biochemical mechanisms that make
thinking possible (
VLL
 23–24). This claim is at odds
with how the social sciences are widely understood and especially with
much thinking in the disciplines of psychology and cognitive science.
From this perspective, “artificial intelligence” is a
category mistake. The social sciences for the most part belong with
the humanities, not with the natural sciences.



Another misstep is to suppose that the word “social”
designates a subject for investigation. Sociology, Oakeshott argues,
is not a discipline with its own subject matter; it’s what
remains when disciplines like economics and psychology have claimed
certain aspects of human activity as their own. The study of a
residual category cannot compose a distinct and coherent discipline,
and there is not in fact any general science of society that grounds
the conclusions of the various social sciences. What are loosely
called social relationships are actually relationships in terms of
historically specific practices, habits, customs, rules, and roles.
They are not, as sociologists are inclined to assume,





components of an unspecified, unconditional interdependence or
“social” relationship, something called a
“society” or “Society”. (
VLL
 24)





This is not to make a point about nomenclature; it is to claim that a
proper discipline has boundaries that enable a coherent inquiry. For
Oakeshott, the category that defines coherent inquiry into human
conduct is not “social” but “intelligent”.
Intelligence, here, is the quality of having agency, the capacity to
think and choose, not of being smart as opposed to stupid in
exercising it. An excavated object is either a manifestation of
intelligence (such as an arrowhead or a tablet) or not (a rock). This
is not to suggest that the experienced world is made up of two kinds
of things but rather that we experience the world differently
according to the categories of understanding that we bring to it. For
an understanding to be coherent, it must distinguish between the
intelligent and the not-intelligent because these categories are
mutually exclusive. No inquiry can generate a self-consistent body of
knowledge if its objects are categorially ambiguous: cross-modal
arguments are necessarily incoherent.



The humanities and humanistic social sciences characteristically
interpret acts in relation to institutions, traditions, genres, and
other practices, each of which can be understood as a
“language” of human action. But the understanding thereby
gained is incomplete, Oakeshott argues, because what it reveals is not
the individuality of an act but rather its
“conventionality” (
OHC
 99–100), the

type
 of conduct it illustrates. Interpreting these
conventions can help to understand contexts or situations (practices),
but it cannot explain the occurrence of particular acts
(performances): why a particular person did such and such a thing on
this or that occasion. The individuality of an act is explained
historically by relating it to antecedent events that led to its
occurrence as a performance with its particular characteristics. An
individual act is one in a series of acts, each of which has meaning
in relation to acts that preceded it. It is these antecedent acts, or
some of them, that illuminate its unique character. Only explanations
of this kind are properly historical.



This understanding of historical explanation departs sharply from the
positivist “covering law model” (Hempel 1942; Nagel 1961).
Unlike scientific explanations, which are concerned with repeatable
events, historical explanations aim to account for events that are
individual and unique. Positivist theories of historical explanation
get things backward by assuming that the event to be explained is
already understood as an instance of a type of event, but the
historian cannot make this assumption. Historical inquiry is not an
exercise in explaining an event whose character is known in advance of
the effort to explain it. This character has yet to be established,
and it can be established only by showing how antecedent events led to
it rather than to some other event. Historical knowledge can therefore
be said to be constructed. The ideas that the historian uses to
organize an inquiry—Christianity, the Renaissance,
India—are designated, not discovered. And they are changing, not
immutable, identities that dissolve under scrutiny into collections of
events, which are themselves identities. Historical explanation means
illuminating the circumstantial meaning of an event in relation to its
antecedents, which in a genuinely historical inquiry are always events
and never scientific laws or processes. In a historical explanation,
an event to be explained is made intelligible as the outcome of what
the evidence suggests are the relevant antecedents. In this theory,
which Oakeshott develops in the second of three late essays on
historical inquiry (
OH
 45–96), a particular historical
past appears as a collection of contingently related events, often
presented as a story. But not necessarily: he disagrees with the view,
which was gaining adherents at the time he was writing, that what
distinguishes historical from other kinds of explanations is that they
take the form of a narrative (Ankersmit 1983; Danto 2007). But this
mistakes the possible for the necessary. Although historians often
construct narratives, a narrative is not the only way to present
historical knowledge.



The task of historical inquiry is to establish historical knowledge,
according to the canons of the historian’s craft, from evidence
that is always scattered, unreliable, and open to interpretation. A
historical fact is not a given. It is a conclusion: not “what
really happened” but “what the evidence requires us to
believe” (
EM
 112). Historians identify as historical
facts the conclusions that their investigations of survivals from the
past, refined as evidence, best support. If historical knowledge is a
construction, it follows that what the historian identifies as the
past is actually present because it is what the evidence supports

now
. This point, fundamental to the modern discipline of
critical history, was made in 1852 by Gustav Droysen, who argued
that





the data for historical investigation are not past things, for these
have disappeared, but things which are still present here and now,
whether recollections of what was done, or remnants of things that
have existed and of events that have occurred. (Droysen 1893: 11)





The historian begins not with the past itself but with survivals from
the past that need to be authenticated and interpreted before they can
be used as evidence.



Historical inquiry constructs a past but historical facts are present
because all facts are present, that is, exist as conclusions within a
present body of knowledge. A historical past is constructed according
to what present evidence—an object, such as a coin or other
artifact that has survived and is treated as evidence—compels
the historian to believe. Nor is this historical past the only
possible kind of past: if there is a historical past then there must
be other, non-historical, pasts constructed in modes other than the
historical (OH 9):





even the most severely “historical” concern with the past
is still liable to be compromised by seeking the answer to questions
which are not historical questions and by asides and even judgments
which belong to some other mode of understanding. (OH 118)





A scientific past, such as what happened during the first three
minutes of our universe, must be distinguished from the historical
past. But the cosmos, or some part of it (the earth, for example), is
an individual and has a “history” in one sense of that
term. Oakeshott’s restriction of history to human events and
historical explanation to making sense of those events as intelligent
acts narrows the definition of the historical past and historical
inquiry. It implies that there is no such thing as “natural
history”, no history of the earth before human beings emerged to
populate it. Geological changes are the outcome of geological
processes but they are also individual events. The elevation or
erosion of a particular mountain range is part of the natural history
of the earth and explaining it involves ascertaining how one event led
to another. If, like Oakeshott, we think of history as necessarily
involving intelligent thought and action, such an explanation would
not count as historical. Geology underlines the historical as well as
scientific character of the nonhuman world (Rudwick 2014).



A different aspect of Oakeshott’s conception of historical
inquiry can be brought out by comparing it with R.G.
Collingwood’s claim that historical understanding entails
reenacting the past (Collingwood 1993 [1946]: 282–302). That
claim makes historical truth subjective by requiring that the
historian reconstruct past events as they were experienced by those
who participated in them. But this privileges the understandings of
the participants, who may not have understood or even known what was
happening. Their ideas are important in constructing a past but are
not everything we need to know to understand it. To argue otherwise is
to argue that the historian is barred from having any ideas about a
given past that “would have been impossible for anyone who lived
in that past” (Oakeshott 2008: 49). Oakeshott also rejects
Collingwood’s claim that “all philosophy is the philosophy
of history” (Collingwood 1993 [1926]: 425) because it makes
philosophy, and by implication all knowledge, subservient to
historical knowledge (Oakeshott 2007: 199). Collingwood’s
argument for the primacy of history (historicism) is as reductionist
as arguments for the primacy of science (scientism) or practice
(pragmatism). The argument that one kind of understanding is the
foundation of other kinds assumes the truth of what it sets out to
prove. Historical inquiry constructs knowledge from what it concludes
to be evidence. It does not provide knowledge of a given, pre-modal
reality. If historical pasts are intellectual constructions, there is
no access to these pasts except through historical inquiry.








Bibliography


Works by Oakeshott




Oakeshott, M., 1933 [
EM
], 
Experience and Its
Modes
, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.


–––, (ed.), 1939, 
The Social and Political
Doctrines of Contemporary Europe
, Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.


–––, 1975a [
OHC
], 
On Human
Conduct
, Oxford: Clarendon Press.


–––, 1975b, 
Hobbes on Civil
Association
, Oxford: Basil Blackwell, reprinted 2000,
Indianapolis: Liberty Fund.


–––, 1983 [
OH
], 
On History and
Other Essays
, Oxford: Basil Blackwell, reprinted with different
pagination 1999, Indianapolis: Liberty Fund.


–––, 1989 [
VLL
], 
The Voice of
Liberal Learning
, T. Fuller (ed.), New Haven: Yale University
Press. Reprinted 2001, Indianapolis: Liberty Fund.


–––, 1991 [
RP
], 
Rationalism in
Politics and Other Essays
, New and Expanded Edition, T. Fuller
(ed.), Indianapolis: Liberty Fund. Original edition 1962, London:
Methuen.


–––, 1993a, 
Religion, Politics and the Moral
Life
, T. Fuller (ed.), New Haven: Yale University Press.


–––, 1993b, 
Morality and Politics in Modern
Europe: The Harvard Lectures
, S.R. Letwin (ed.), New Haven: Yale
University Press.


–––, 1996, 
The Politics of Faith and the
Politics of Scepticism
, T. Fuller (ed.), New Haven: Yale
University Press.


–––, 2004, 
What is History? and Other
Essays
, L. O’Sullivan (ed.), Exeter: Imprint Academic.


–––, 2006, 
Lectures in the History of
Political Thought
, T. Nardin and L. O’Sullivan (eds.),
Exeter: Imprint Academic.


–––, 2007, 
The Concept of a Philosophical
Jurisprudence: Essays and Reviews 1926–51
, L.
O’Sullivan (ed.), Exeter: Imprint Academic.


–––, 2008, 
The Vocabulary of a Modern
European State
, L. O’Sullivan (ed.), Exeter: Imprint
Academic.


–––, 2010, 
Early Political Writings
1925–30
, L. O’Sullivan (ed.), Exeter: Imprint
Academic.


–––, 2014, 
Notebooks, 1922–86
, L.
O’Sullivan (ed.), Exeter: Imprint Academic.




Other Works




Ankersmit, F., 1983, 
Narrative Logic: A Semantic Analysis of
the Historian’s Language
, The Hague: Nijhoff.


Aristotle, 4
th
 Century BCE, 
The Nichomachean
Ethics
, D. Ross (trans.), Oxford: Oxford University Press,
1980.


Backhurst, D. and P. Fairfield (eds.), 2016, 
Education and
Conversation: Exploring Oakeshott’s Legacy
, London:
Bloomsbury.


Boucher, D., 2012, “Oakeshott in the Context of British
Idealism”, in Podoksik 2012: 247–273.


Butterfield, H., 1931, 
The Whig Interpretation of
History
, London: G. Bell and Sons.


Collingwood, R., 1924, 
Speculum Mentis
, Oxford: Oxford
University Press.


–––, 1993 [1926], “Lectures on the
Philosophy of History”, in Collingwood 1993 [1946]:
359–425.


–––, 1993 [1946], 
The Idea of History
,
rev. ed., J. Van Der Dussen (ed.), Oxford: Oxford University
Press.


Cowling, M., 2003, 
Religion and Public Doctrine in Modern
England
, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.


Danto, A., 2007, 
Narration and Knowledge
, New York:
Columbia University Press.


de Jongh, M., 2022, “Public Goods in Michael
Oakeshott’s ‘World of Pragmata’”, 
European
Journal of Political Theory
, 21(3): 561–584.


Descartes, R., 1641, 
Meditations on First Philosophy
, J.
Cottingham (trans.), Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1996.


Droysen, J., 1893, 
Outline of the Principles of History
,
E.B. Andrews (trans.), Boston: Ginn & Co.


Dyzenhaus, D. and T. Poole (eds.), 2015, 
Law, Liberty and
State: Oakeshott, Hayek and Schmitt on the Rule of Law
,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.


Franco, P., 2004, 
Michael Oakeshott: An Introduction
, New
Haven: Yale University Press.


Franco, P. and L. Marsh (eds.), 2012, 
A Companion to Michael
Oakeshott
, University Park: The Pennsylvania State University
Press.


Friedman, R., 1989, “Oakeshott on the Authority of
Law”, 
Ratio Juris
, 2(1): 27–40.


Fuller, L., 1969, 
The Morality of Law
, New Haven: Yale
University Press.


Grant, R., 1990, 
Oakeshott
, London: Claridge Press.


–––, 2012, “The Pursuit of Intimacy, or
Rationalism in Love”, in Franco and Marsh 2012: 15–44


Haddock, B., 2005, “Contingency and Judgement in
Oakeshott’s Political Thought”, 
European Journal of
Political Theory
, 4(1): 7–21.


Hart, H., 1958, “Positivism and the Separation of Law and
Morals”, 
Harvard Law Review
, 71(4): 593–629.


Hempel, C., 1942, “The Function of General Laws in
History”, 
Journal of Philosophy
, 39(2):
35–48.


Hexter, D. and M. Kenny, “Intimations of Oakeshott: A
Critical Reading of his ‘Notebooks, 1922–86’”,

European Journal of Political Theory
, 18(1):
138–149.


Kant, I., 1793, “ On the Common Saying: That May be Correct
in Theory, but It is of No Use in Practice”, in 
Practical
Philosophy
, M.J. Gregor (trans.), Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 1996, 273–309.


Kos, E. (ed.), 2019, 
Michael Oakeshott on Authority,
Governance, and the State
, London: Palgrave Macmillan.


–––, 2022, 
Oakeshott’s Skepticism,
Politics, and Aesthetics
, London: Palgrave Macmillan.


Marsh, L. (ed.), 2001, 
Michael Oakeshott: Philosopher
,
London: Michael Oakeshott Association.


McIlwain, D., 2019, 
Michael Oakeshott and Leo Strauss: The
Politics of Renaissance and Enlightenment
, London: Palgrave
Macmillan.


Nagel, E., 1961, 
The Structure of Science; Problems in the
Logic of Scientific Explanation
, New York: Harcourt Brace &
World.


Nardin, T., 2001, 
The Philosophy of Michael Oakeshott
,
University Park: Pennsylvania State University Press.


–––, 2015, “Oakeshott on Theory and
Practice”, 
Global Discourse
, 5(2): 310–322.


–––, (ed.), 2015, 
Michael Oakeshott’s
Cold War Liberalism
, New York: Palgrave Macmillan.


Neill, E., 2013, “Michael Oakeshott and Hans-Georg Gadamer
on Practices, Social Science, and Modernity”, 
History of
European Ideas
, 40(3): 1–31.


Norman, J. (ed.), 1993, 
The Achievement of Michael
Oakeshott
, London: Duckworth.


Orsi, D., 2016, 
Michael Oakeshott’s Political Philosophy
of International Relations: Civil Association and International
Society
, London: Palgrave Macmillan.


O’Sullivan, L., 2003, 
Oakeshott on History
, Exeter:
Imprint Academic.


–––, 2014, “Michael Oakeshott and the
Left”, 
Journal of the History of Ideas
, 75(3):
471–492.


–––, 2024, 
Categories: A Study of a Concept
in Western Philosophy and Political Thought
, Edinburgh: Edinburgh
University Press.


O’Sullivan, N. (ed.), 2017, 
The Place of Michael
Oakeshott in Contemporary Western and Non-Western Thought
,
Exeter: Imprint Academic.


Pettit, P., 1997, 
Republicanism: A Theory of Freedom and
Government
, Oxford: Oxford University Press.


Plotica, L., 2015, 
Michael Oakeshott and the Conversation of
Modern Political Thought
, Albany: State University of New York
Press.


Podoksik, E. (ed.), 2012, 
The Cambridge Companion to
Oakeshott
, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.


Ripstein, A., 2009, 
Force and Freedom: Kant’s Legal and
Political Philosophy
, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press.


Rudwick, M., 2014, 
Earth’s Deep History: How It Was
Discovered and Why It Matters
, Chicago: The University of Chicago
Press.


Skinner, Q., 1998, 
Liberty before Liberalism
, Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.


Ryle, G., 1949, 
The Concept of Mind
, London:
Hutchinson.


Thompson, M., 2019, 
Michael Oakeshott and the Cambridge School
on the History of Political Thought
, London: Routledge.


Wallace, R., 2020, “Practical Reason”, 
The
Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy
 (Spring 2020 Edition), E.
Zalta (ed.), URL =
<
https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/spr2020/entries/practical-reason/
>.


Walzer, M., 1987, 
Interpretation and Social Criticism
,
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.


Williams, K., 2007, 
Education and the Voice of Michael
Oakeshott
, Exeter: Imprint Academic.








Academic Tools










How to cite this entry
.








Preview the PDF version of this entry
 at the
 
Friends of the SEP Society
.








Look up topics and thinkers related to this entry

 at the Internet Philosophy Ontology Project (InPhO).








Enhanced bibliography for this entry

at 
PhilPapers
, with links to its database.












Other Internet Resources




Michael Oakeshott Association








Related Entries




categories
 |
 
history, philosophy of
 |
 
idealism
 |
 
nature of law
 |
 
practical reason










 






Copyright © 2024
 by



Terry Nardin
<
twnardin
@
me
.
com
>
    




 









  Open access to the SEP is made possible by a world-wide funding initiative.

  Please Read How You Can Help Support the Growth and Development of the Encyclopedia




 

