











 
 Entry Navigation 






Entry Contents


Bibliography


Academic Tools


Friends PDF Preview 


Author and Citation Info 
 


Back to Top 


























Darwin: From the 
Origin of Species
 to the 
Descent of Man
First published Mon Jun 17, 2019; substantive revision Wed Mar 13, 2024





This entry offers a broad historical review of the origin and
development of Darwin’s theory of evolution by natural selection
through the initial Darwinian phase of the “Darwinian
Revolution” up to the publication of the 
Descent of Man

in 1871. The development of evolutionary ideas before Darwin’s
work has been treated in the separate entry
 
evolutionary thought before Darwin
.
 Several additional aspects of Darwin’s theory of evolution and
his biographical development are dealt with in other entries in this
encyclopedia (see the entries on
 
Darwinism
;
 
species
;
 
natural selection
;
 
creationism
). The remainder of this entry will focus on aspects of
Darwin’s theory not developed in the other entries. It will also
maintain a historical and textual approach. Other entries in this
encyclopedia cited at the end of the article and the bibliography
should be consulted for discussions beyond this point. The issues will
be examined under the following headings:








1. The Origins of Darwin’s Theory




1.1 Historiographical Issues


1.2 Darwin’s Early Reflections






2. Darwinian Evolution




2.1. The Concept of Natural Selection


2.2. The Argument of the Published 
Origin






3. The Reception of the 
Origin




3.1 The Popular Reception of Darwin’s Theory


3.2 The Professional Reception of Darwin’s Theory






4. Human Evolution and the 
Descent of Man




4.1 The Genesis of Darwin’s 
Descent


4.2 Darwin on Mental Powers


4.3 The Ethical Theory of the 
Descent of Man


4.4 The Reception of the 
Descent
 






5. Summary and Conclusion


Bibliography


Academic Tools


Other Internet Resources


Related Entries


Acknowledgments










1. The Origins of Darwin’s Theory


1.1 Historiographical Issues



Charles Darwin’s version of transformism has been the subject of
massive historical and philosophical scholarship almost unparalleled
in any other area of the history of science. This includes the
continued flow of monographic studies and collections of articles on
particular aspects of Darwin’s theory (Prestes 2023; R. J.
Richards and Ruse 2016; Ruse 2013a, 2009a,b,c; Ruse and Richards 2009;
Hodge and Radick 2009; Hösle and Illies 2005; Gayon 1998; Bowler
1996; Depew and Weber 1995; Kohn 1985a). The continuous production of
popular and professional biographical studies on Darwin provides ever
new insights (Ruse et al. 2013a; Johnson 2012; Desmond and Moore 1991,
2009; Browne 1995, 2002; Bowlby 1990; Bowler 1990). In addition, major
editing projects on Darwin’s manuscripts and the completion of
the 
Correspondence
, project through the entirety of
Darwin’s life, continue to reveal details and new insights into
the issues surrounding Darwin’s own thought (Keynes [ed.] 2000;
Burkhardt et al. [eds] 1985–2023; Barrett et al. [eds.] 1987).
The Cambridge Darwin Online website (see
 
Other Internet Resources
)
 serves as an international clearinghouse for this worldwide Darwinian
scholarship, functioning as a repository for electronic versions of
all the original works of Darwin, including manuscripts and related
secondary materials. It also supplies a continuously updated guide to
current literature.



A long tradition of scholarship has interpreted Darwin’s theory
to have originated from a framework defined by endemic British natural
history, a British tradition of natural theology defined particularly
by William Paley (1743–1805), the methodological precepts of
John Herschel (1792–1871), developed in his 
A Preliminary
Discourse on the Study of Natural Philosophy
 (1830 [1987]), and
the geological theories of Charles Lyell (1797–1875). His
conversion to the uniformitarian geology of Charles Lyell and to
Lyell’s advocacy of “deep” geological time during
the voyage of the 
HMS Beagle
 (December 1831–October
1836), has been seen as fundamental in his formation (Norman 2013;
Herbert 2005; Hodge 1983). Complementing this predominantly anglophone
historiography has been the social-constructivist analyses emphasizing
the origins of Darwin’s theories in British Political Economy
(Young 1985: chps. 2, 4, 5). It has also been argued that a primary
generating source of Darwin’s inquiries was his involvement with
the British anti-slavery movement, a concern reaching back to his
revulsion against slavery developed during the 
Beagle
 years
(Desmond and Moore 2009).



A body of recent historiography, on the other hand, drawing on the
wealth of manuscripts and correspondence that have become available
since the 1960s (online at Darwin online “Papers and
Manuscripts” section, see
 
Other Internet Resources
)
 has de-emphasized some of the novelty of Darwin’s views and
questions have been raised regarding the validity of the standard
biographical picture of the early Darwin. These materials have drawn
attention to previously ignored aspects of Darwin’s biography.
In particular, the importance of his Edinburgh period from
1825–27, largely discounted in importance by Darwin himself in
his late 
Autobiography
, has been seen as critical for his
subsequent development (Desmond and Moore 1991; Hodge 1985). As a
young medical student at the University of Edinburgh (1825–27),
Darwin developed a close relationship with the comparative anatomist
Robert Edmond Grant (1793–1874) through the student Plinian
Society, and in many respects Grant served as Darwin’s first
mentor in science in the pre-
Beagle
 years (Desmond and Moore
1991, chp. 1). Through Grant he was exposed to the transformist
theories of Jean Baptiste Lamarck and the Cuvier-Geoffroy debate
centered on the Paris 
Muséum nationale d’histoire
naturelle
 (see entry on
 
evolutionary thought before Darwin
,
 Section 4).



These differing interpretive frameworks make investigations into the
origins of Darwin’s theory an active area of historical
research. The following section will explore these origins.


1.2 Darwin’s Early Reflections



In its historical origins, Darwin’s theory was different in kind
from its main predecessors in important ways (Ruse 2013b; Sloan 2009a;
see also the entry on
 
evolutionary thought before Darwin
).
 Viewed against a longer historical scenario, Darwin’s theory
does not deal with cosmology or the origins of the world and life
through naturalistic means, and therefore was more restricted in its
theoretical scope than its main predecessors influenced by the
reflections of Georges Louis LeClerc de Buffon (1707–1788),
Johann Herder (1744–1803, and German 
Naturphilosophen

inspired by Friederich Schelling (1775–1854)
.
 This
restriction also distinguished Darwin’s work from the grand
evolutionary cosmology put forth anonymously in 1844 by the Scottish
publisher Robert Chambers (1802–1871) in his immensely popular

Vestiges of the Natural History of Creation
, a work which in
many respects prepared Victorian society in England, and pre-Civil War
America for the acceptance of a general evolutionary theory in some
form (Secord 2000; MacPherson 2015). It also distinguishes
Darwin’s formulations from the theories of his contemporary
Herbert Spencer (1820–1903).



Darwin’s theory first took written form in reflections in a
series of notebooks begun during the latter part of the

Beagle
 voyage and continued after the return of the

Beagle
 to England in October of 1836 (Barrett et al., 1987).
His reflections on the possibility of species change are first entered
in March of 1837 (“Red Notebook”) and are developed in the
other notebooks (B–E) through July of 1839 (Barrett et al. 1987;
Hodge 2013a, 2009). Beginning with the reflections of the third or
“D” “transmutation” Notebook, composed between
July and October of 1838, Darwin first worked out the rudiments of
what was to become his theory of natural selection. In the parallel
“M” and “N” Notebooks, dating between July of
1838 and July of 1839, and in a loose collection called “Old and
Useless Notes”, dating from approximately 1838–40, he also
developed many of his main ideas on human evolution that would only be
made public in the 
Descent of Man
 of 1871 (below, Section
4).



To summarize a complex issue, these Notebook reflections show Darwin
proceeding through a series of stages in which he first formulated a
general theory of the transformation of species by historical descent
from common ancestors. He then attempted to work out a causal theory
of life that would explain the tendency of life to complexify and
diversify (Hodge 2013a, 2009, 1985; Sloan 1986). This causal inquiry
into the underlying nature of life, and with it the search for an
explanation of life’s innate tendency to develop and complexify,
was then replaced by a dramatic shift in focus away from these
inquiries. This concern with a causal theory of life was then replaced
by a new emphasis on external forces controlling population, a thesis
developed from his reading of Thomas Malthus’s (1766–1834)

Essay on the Principle of Population
 (6th ed. 1826). For
Malthus, human populaton was assumed to expand geometrically, while
food supply expanded arithmetically, leading to an inevitable struggle
of humans for existence. The impact of Darwin’s reading of this
edition of the 
Essay
 in August of 1838, was dramatic. It
enabled him to theorize the existence of a constantly-acting dynamic
force behind the transformation of species.



Darwin’s innovation was to 
universalize
 the Malthusian
“principle of population” to apply to all of nature. In so
doing, Darwin effectively introduced what may be termed an
“inertial” principle into his theory, although such
language is never used in his text. Newton’s first law of
motion, set forth in his 
Mathematical Principles of Natural
Philosophy
 (1st ed. 1687), established his physical system upon
the tendency of all material bodies to persist eternally either at
rest or in uniform motion in a straight line, requiring a causal force
explanation for any deviations from this initial state. But Newton did
not seek a deeper metaphysical explanation of this inertial state. Law
One is simply an “axiom” in Newton’s

Principia.
 Similarly, the principle of population supplied
Darwin with the assumption of an initial dynamic state of affairs that
was not itself explained within the theory—there is no attempt
to account causally for this tendency of living beings universally to
reproduce geometrically. Similarly for Darwin, the principle of
population functions axiomatically, defining a set of initial
conditions from which any deviance from this ideal state demands
explanation.



This theoretical shift enabled Darwin to bracket his earlier efforts
to develop a causal theory of life, and focus instead on the means by
which the dynamic force of population was controlled. This allowed him
to emphasize how controls on population worked in company with the
phenomenon of slight individual variation between members of the same
species, in company with changing conditions of life, to produce a
gradual change of form and function over time, leading to new
varieties and eventually to new species. This opened up the framework
for Darwin’s most important innovation, the concept of
“natural” selection.


2. Darwinian Evolution


2.1. The Concept of Natural Selection



The primary distinguishing feature of Darwin’s theory that
separates it from previous explanations of species change centers on
the causal explanation he offered for how this process occurred. Prior
theories, such as the theory of Jean-Baptiste Lamarck (see entry on
 
evolutionary thought before Darwin
),
 relied on the inherent dynamic properties of matter. The change of
species was not, in these pre-Darwinian efforts, explained through an
adaptive process. Darwin’s emphasis after the composition of
Notebook D on the factors controlling population increase, rather than
on a dynamic theory of life grounded in vital forces, accounts for
many of the differences between Darwin’s theory and those of his
predecessors and contemporaries.



These differences can be summarized in the concept of natural
selection as the central theoretical component of Darwinian theory.
However, the exact meaning of this concept, and the varying ways he
stated the principle in the 
Origin
 over its six editions
(1859–1872), has given rise to multiple interpretations of the
meaning of this principle in the history of Darwinism, and the
different understandings of his meaning deeply affected different
national and cultural receptions of his theory (see below,
 
Section 3
.1).



One way to see the complexity of Darwin’s own thinking on these
issues is to follow the textual development of this concept from the
close of the Notebook period (1839) to the publication of the

Origin of Species
 in 1859. This period of approximately
twenty years involved Darwin in a series of reflections that form
successive strata in the final version of his theory of the evolution
of species. Understanding the historical sequence of these
developments also has significance for subsequent controversies over
this concept and the different readings of the 
Origin
 as it
went through its successive revisions. This historical development of
the concept also has some bearing on assessing Darwin’s
relevance for more general philosophical questions, such as those
surrounding the relevance of his theory for such issues as the concept
of a more general teleology of nature.



The earliest set of themes in the manuscript elaboration of natural
selection theory can be characterized as those developed through a
particular form of the argument from analogy. This took the form of a
strong “proportional” form of the analogical argument that
equated the relation of human selection to the development of domestic
breeds as an argument of the basic form: human selection is to
domestic variety formation as natural selection is to natural species
formation (White, Hodge and Radick 2021, chps. 4–5). This makes
a direct analogy between the actions of nature with those of humans in
the process of selection. The specific expressions, and changes, in
this analogy are important to follow closely. As this was expressed in
the first coherent draft of the theory, a 39-page pencil manuscript
written in 1842, this discussion analogized the concept of selection
of forms by human agency in the creation of the varieties of domestic
animals and plants, to the active selection in the natural world by an
almost conscious agency, a “being infinitely more sagacious than
man (not an omniscient creator)” who acts over “thousands
and thousands of years” on “all the variations which
tended towards certain ends” (Darwin 1842 in Glick and Kohn
1996, 91). This agency selects out those features most beneficial to
organisms in relation to conditions of life, analogous in its action
to the selection by man on domestic forms in the production of
different breeds. Interwoven with these references to an almost
Platonic demiurge are appeals to the selecting power of an active
“Nature”:





Nature’s variation far less, but such selection far more rigid
and scrutinizing […] Nature lets <<an>> animal
live, till on actual proof it is found less able to do the required
work to serve the desired end, man judges solely by his eye, and knows
not whether nerves, muscles, arteries, are developed in proportion to
the change of external form. (Ibid., 93)





These themes were continued in the 230 page draft of his theory of
1844. Again he referred to the selective action of a wise “Being
with penetration sufficient to perceive differences in the outer and
innermost organization quite imperceptible to man, and with
forethought extending over future centuries to watch with unerring
care and select for any object the offspring of an organism
produced” (Darwin 1844 in ibid., 101). This selection was made
with greater foresight and wisdom than human selection. As he
envisions the working of this causal agency,





In accordance with the plan by which this universe seems governed by
the Creator, let us consider whether there exist any

secondary
 means in the economy of nature by which the process
of selection could go on adapting, nicely and wonderfully, organisms,
if in ever so small a degree plastic, to diverse ends. I believe such
secondary means do exist. (Ibid., 103).





Darwin returned to these issues in 1856, following a twelve-year
period in which he published his 
Geological Observations on the
Volcanic Islands
 (1844), the second edition of his 
Journal of
Researches
 (1845), 
Geological Observations on South
America
 (1846), the four volumes on fossil and living barnacles
(
Cirripedia
) (1851, 54, 55), and 
Geological Observations
on Coral Reefs
 (1851). In addition, he published several smaller
papers on invertebrate zoology and on geology, and reported on his
experiments on the resistance of seeds to salt water, a topic that
would be of importance in his explanation of the population of remote
islands.



These intervening inquiries positioned Darwin to deal with the
question of species permanence against an extensive empirical
background. The initial major synthesis of these investigations takes
place in his long manuscript, or “Big Species Book”,
commenced in 1856, known in current scholarship as the “Natural
Selection” manuscript. This formed the immediate background text
behind the published 
Origin
. Although incomplete, the
“Natural Selection” manuscript provides insights into many
critical issues in Darwin’s thinking. It was also prepared with
an eye to the scholarly community. This distinguishes its content and
presentation from that of the subsequent “abstract” which
became the published 
Origin of Species
. “Natural
Selection” contained tables of data, references to scholarly
literature, and other apparatus expected of a non-popular work, none
of which appeared in the published 
Origin
.



The “Natural Selection” manuscript also contained some new
theoretical developments of relevance to the concept of natural
selection that are not found in earlier manuscripts. Scholars have
noted the introduction in this manuscript of the “principle of
divergence”, the thesis that organisms under the action of
natural selection will tend to radiate and diversify within their
“conditions of life”—the contemporary name for the
complex of environmental and species-interaction relationships (Kohn
1985b, 2009). Although the concept of group divergence under the
action of natural selection might be seen as an implication of
Darwin’s theory from his earliest formulations of the 1830s,
nonetheless Darwin’s explicit definition of this as a
“principle”, and its discussion in a long late insertion
in the “Natural Selection” manuscript, suggests its
importance for Darwin’s mature theory. The principle of
divergence was now seen by Darwin to form an important link between
natural variation and the conditions of existence under the action of
the driving force of population increase.



Still evident in the “Natural Selection” manuscript is
Darwin’s implicit appeal to some kind of teleological ordering
of the process. The action of the masculine-gendered “wise
being” of the earlier manuscripts, however, has now been given
over entirely to the action of a selective “Nature”, now
referred to in the traditional feminine gender. This Nature,





…cares not for mere external appearance; she may be said to
scrutinise with a severe eye, every nerve, vessel & muscle; every
habit, instinct, shade of constitution,—the whole machinery of
the organisation. There will be here no caprice, no favouring: the
good will be preserved & the bad rigidly destroyed.… Can we
wonder then, that nature’s productions bear the stamp of a far
higher perfection than man’s product by artificial selection.
With nature the most gradual, steady, unerring, deep-sighted
selection,—perfect adaption [sic] to the conditions of
existence.… (Darwin 1856–58 [1974: 224–225])





The language of this passage, directly underlying statements about the
action of “natural selection” in the first edition of the
published 
Origin
, indicates the complexity in the exegesis of
Darwin’s meaning of “natural selection” when viewed
in light of its historical genesis (Ospovat 1981). The parallels
between art and nature, the intentionality implied in the term
“selection”, the notion of “perfect”
adaptation, and the substantive conception of “nature” as
an agency working toward certain ends, all render Darwin’s views
on teleological purpose more complex than they are typically
interpreted from the standpoint of contemporary Neo-selectionist
theory (Lennox 1993, 2013). As will be discussed below, the changes
Darwin subsequently made in his formulations of this concept over the
history of the 
Origin
 have led to different conceptions of
what he meant by this principle.



The hurried preparation and publication of the 
Origin
 between
the summer of 1858 and November of 1859 was prompted by the receipt on
June 18 of 1858 of a letter and manuscript from Alfred Russel Wallace
(1823–1913) that outlined his remarkably similar views on the
possibility of continuous species change under the action of a
selection upon natural variation (Wallace 1858 in Glick and Kohn 1996,
337–45). This event had important implications for the
subsequent form of Darwin’s published argument. Rapidly
condensing the detailed arguments of the unfinished “Natural
Selection” manuscript into shorter chapters, Darwin also
universalized several claims that he had only developed with reference
to specific groups of organisms, or which he had applied only to more
limited situations in the manuscript. This resulted in a presentation
of his theory at the level of broad generalization. The absence of
tables of data, detailed footnotes, and references to the secondary
literature in the published version also resulted in predictable
criticisms which will be discussed below in
 
Section 3.2
.


2.2. The Central Argument of the Published 
Origin



The 
Origin of Species by Means of Natural Selection, or the
Preservaton of Favoured Races in the Struggle for Life
 was issued
in London by the publishing house of John Murray on November 24, 1859
(Darwin 1859 [1964]). The structure of the argument presented in the
published 
Origin
 has been the topic of considerable
literature and can only be summarized here. Although Darwin himself
described his book as “one long argument”, the exact
nature of this argument is not immediately transparent, and
alternative interpretations have been made of his reasoning and
rhetorical strategies in formulating his evolutionary theory. (Prestes
2023; White, Hodge and Radick 2021; Hodge 2013b, 1977; Hoquet 2013;
Hull 2009; Waters 2009; Depew 2009; Ruse 2009; Lennox 2005; Hodge
1983b).



The scholarly reconstruction of Darwin’s methodology employed in
the 
Origin
 has taken two primary forms. One approach has been
to reconstruct it from the standpoint of currently accepted models of
scientific explanation, sometimes presenting it as a formal deductive
model (Sober 1984). Another, more historical, approach interprets his
methodology in the context of accepted canons of scientific
explanation found in Victorian discussions of the period (see the
entry on
 
Darwinism
;
 Prestes 2023; White, Hodge and Radick 2021; Hodge 2013b, 1983b, 1977;
Hoquet 2013; Hull 2009; Waters 2009; Depew 2009; Lennox 2005). The
degree to which Darwin did in fact draw from the available
methodological discussions of his contemporaries—John Herschel,
William Whewell, John Stuart Mill—is not fully clear from
available documentary sources. The claim most readily documented, and
defended particularly by White, Hodge and Radick (2021) and M. J. S.
Hodge (1977, 1983a), has emphasized the importance of John
Herschel’s 
A Preliminary Discourse on the Study of Natural
Philosophy
 (1830 [1987]), which Darwin read as a young student at
Cambridge prior to his departure on the 
HMS Beagle
 in
December of 1831.



In Herschel’s text he would have encountered the claim that
science seeks to determine “true causes”—
vera
causae—
of phenomena through the satisfaction of explicit
criteria of adequacy (Herschel, 1830 [1987], chp. 6). This concept
Newton had specified in the 
Principia
 as the third of his
“Rules of Reasoning in Philosophy” (see the entry on
 
Newton’s philosophy
,
 Section 4). Elucidation of such causes was to be the goal of
scientific explanation. 
Vera causae
, in Herschel’s
formulation, were those necessary to produce the given effects; they
were truly active in producing the effects; and they adequately
explained these effects.



The other plausible methodological source for Darwin’s mature
reasoning was the work of his older contemporary and former Cambridge
mentor, the Rev. William Whewell (1794–1866), whose three-volume

History of the Inductive Sciences
 (Whewell 1837) Darwin read
with care after his return from his round-the-world voyage (Ruse
2013c, 1975). On this reading, a plausible argument has been made that
the actual structure of Darwin’s text is more closely similar to
a “Whewellian” model of argument. In Whewell’s
accounts of his philosophy of scientific methodology (Whewell 1840,
1858), the emphasis of scientific inquiry is, as Herschel had also
argued, to be placed on the discovery of “true causes”.
But evidence for the determination of a 
vera causa
 was to be
demonstrated by the ability of disparate phenomena to be drawn
together under a single unifying “Conception of the Mind”,
exemplified for Whewell by Newton’s universal law of
gravitation. This “Consilience of Inductions”, as Whewell
termed this process of theoretical unification under a few simple
concepts, was achieved only by true scientific theories employing true
causes (Whewell 1840: xxxix). It has therefore been argued that
Darwin’s theory fundamentally produces this kind of consilience
argument, and that his methodology is more properly aligned with that
of Whewell.



A third account, related to the Whewellian reading, is that of David
Depew. Building on Darwin’s claim that he was addressing
“the general naturalist public,” Darwin is seen as
developing what Depew has designated as “situated
argumentation”, similar to the views developed by contemporary
Oxford logician and rhetorical theorist Richard Whately
(1787–1863) (Depew 2009). This rhetorical strategy proceeds by
drawing the reader into Darwin’s world by personal narration as
it presents a series of limited issues for acceptance in the first
three chapters, none of which required of the reader a considerable
leap of theoretical assent, and most of which, such as natural
variation and Malthusian population increase, had already been
recognized in some form in the literature of the period.



As Darwin presented his arguments to the public, he opens with a pair
of chapters that draw upon the strong analogy developed in the
manuscripts between the action of human art in the production of
domestic forms, and the actions of selection “by nature.”
The resultant forms are presumed to have arisen through the action of
human selection on the slight variations existing between individuals
within the same species. The interpretation of this process as
implying directional, and even intentional, selection by a
providential “Nature” that we have seen in the manuscripts
was, however, downplayed in the published work through the importance
given by Darwin to the role of “unconscious” selection, a
concept not encountered in the Natural Selection manuscript. Such
selection denotes the practice even carried out by aboriginal peoples
who simply seek to maintain the integrity and survival of a breed or
species by preserving the “best” forms.



The domestic breeding analogy is, however, more than a decorative
rhetorical strategy. It repeatedly functions for Darwin as the
principal empirical example to which he could appeal at several places
in the text as a means of visualizing the working of natural selection
in nature, and this appeal remains intact through the six editions of
the 
Origin.



From this model of human selection working on small individual natural
variations to produce the domestic forms, Darwin then developed in the
second chapter the implications of “natural” variation,
delaying discussion of the concept of natural selection until Chapter
IV. The focus of the second chapter introduces another important
issue. Here he extends the discussion of variation developed in
Chapter I into a critical analysis of the common understanding of
classification as grounded on the definition of species and higher
groups based on the possession of essential defining properties. It is
in this chapter that Darwin most explicitly develops his own position
on the nature of organic species in relation to his theory of descent.
It is also in this chapter that he sets forth the ingredients for his
attack on one meaning of species “essentialism”.



Darwin’s analysis of the “species question” involves
a complex argument that has many implications for how his work was
read by his contemporaries and successors, and its interpretation has
generated a considerable literature (see the entries on
 
species

 and
 
Darwinism
;
 Mallet 2013; R. A. Richards 2010; Wilkins 2009; Stamos 2007; Sloan
2009b, 2013; Beatty 1985).



Prior tradition had been heavily affected by eighteenth-century French
naturalist Buffon’s novel conception of organic species in which
he made a sharp distinction between “natural” species,
defined primarily by fertile interbreeding, and
“artificial” species and varieties defined by
morphological traits and measurements upon these (see the entry on
 
evolutionary thought before Darwin
,
 Section 3.3). This distinction was utilized selectively by Darwin in
an unusual blending of two traditions of discussion that are conflated
in creative ways in Darwin’s analysis.



Particularly as the conception of species had been discussed by German
natural historians of the early nineteenth-century affected by
distinctions introduced by philosopher Immanuel Kant
(1724–1804), “Buffonian” species were defined by the
material unity of common descent and reproductive continuity. This
distinguished them by their historical and material character from the
taxonomic species of the “Linnean” tradition of natural
history. This distinction between “natural” and
“logical” species had maintained a distinction between
problems presented in the practical classification of preserved
specimens, distinguished by external characters, and those relating to
the unity of natural species, which was grounded upon reproductive
unity and the sterility criterion (Sloan 2009b).



Remarkable in Darwin’s argument is the way in which he draws
selectively in his readings from these two preexistent traditions to
undermine the different grounds of species “realism”
assumed within both of these traditions of discourse. One
framework—what can be considered in his immediate context the
“Linnean” tradition—regarded species in the sense of
universals of logic or class concepts, whose “reality” was
often grounded on the concept of divine creation. The alternative
“Buffonian” tradition viewed species more naturalistically
as material lineages of descent whose continuity was determined by
some kind of immanent principle, such as the possession of a
conserving “internal mold” or specifying vital force (see
 
evolutionary thought before Darwin

 3.3). The result in Darwin’s hands is a complex terminological
interweaving of concepts of Variety, Race, Sub-species, Tribe, and
Family that can be shown to be a fusion of different traditions of
discussion in the literature of the period. This creative conflation
also led to many confusions among his contemporaries about how Darwin
actually did conceive of species and species change in time.



Darwin addresses the species question by raising the problems caused
by natural variation in the practical discrimination of taxa at the
species and varietal levels, an issue with which he had become closely
familiar in his taxonomic revision of the Sub-class

Cirripedia
 (barnacles) in his eight-year study on this group.
Although the difficulty of taxonomic distinctions at this level was a
well-recognized problem in the literature of the time, Darwin subtly
transforms this 
practical
 problem into a

metaphysical
 ambiguity—the fuzziness of formal
taxonomic distinctions created by variation in preserved specimens is
seen to imply a similar ambiguity of “natural” species
boundaries.



We follow this in reading how natural variation is employed by Darwin
in Chapter Two of the 
Origin
 to break down the distinction
between species and varieties as these concepts were commonly employed
in the practical taxonomic literature. The arbitrariness apparent in
making distinctions, particularly in plants and invertebrates, meant
that such species were only what “naturalists having sound
judgment and wide experience” defined them to be
(
Origin
 1859 [1964], 47). These arguments form the basis for
claims by his contemporaries that Darwin was a species
“nominalist”, who defined species only as conventional and
convenient divisions of a continuum of individuals.



But this feature of Darwin’s discussion of species captures only
in part the complexity of his argument. Drawing also on the tradition
of species realism developed within the “Buffonian”
tradition, Darwin also affirmed that species and varieties are defined
by common descent and material relations of interbreeding. Darwin then
employed the ambiguity of the distinction between species and
varieties created by individual variation in practical taxonomy to
undermine the ontological fixity of “natural” species.
Varieties are not simply the formal taxonomic subdivisions of a
natural species as conceived in the Linnaean tradition. They are, as
he terms them, “incipient” species (ibid., 52). This
subtly transformed the issue of local variation and adaptation to
circumstances into a primary ingredient for historical evolutionary
change. The full implications to be drawn from this argument were,
however, only to be revealed in Chapter Four of the text.



Before assembling the ingredients of these first two chapters, Darwin
then introduced in Chapter Three the concept of a “struggle for
existence”. This concept is introduced in a “large and
metaphorical sense” that included different levels of organic
interactions, from direct struggle for food and space to the struggle
for life of a plant in a desert. Although described as an application
of Thomas Malthus’s parameter of geometrical increase of
population in relation to the arithmetical increase of food supply,
Darwin’s use of this concept in fact 
reinterprets

Malthus’s principle, which was formulated only with reference to
human population in relation to food supply. It now becomes a general
principle governing all of organic life. Thus all organisms, including
those comprising food for others, would be governed by the tendency to
geometrical increase.



Through this universalization, the controls on population become only
in the extreme case grounded directly on the traditional Malthusian
limitations of food and space. Normal controls are instead exerted
through a complex network of relationships of species acting one on
another in predator-prey, parasite-host, and food-web relations. This
profound revision of Malthus’s arguments rendered Darwin’s
theory deeply “ecological” as this term would later be
employed. We can cite two thought experiments employed by Darwin
himself as illustrations (ibid., 72–74). The first concerns the
explanation of the abundance of red clover in England. This Darwin
sees as dependent on the numbers of pollinating humble bees, which are
controlled in turn by the number of mice, and these are controlled by
the number of cats, making cats the remote determinants of clover
abundance. The second instance concerns the explanation of the
abundance of Scotch Fir. In this example, the number of fir trees is
limited indirectly by the number of cattle.



With the ingredients of the first three chapters in place, Darwin was
positioned to assemble these together in his grand synthesis of
Chapter Four on “natural” selection. In this long
discussion, Darwin develops the main exposition of his central
theoretical concept. For his contemporaries and for the subsequent
tradition, however, the meaning of Darwin’s concept of
“natural” selection was not unambiguously evident for
reasons we have outlined above, and these unclarities were to be the
source of several persistent lines of disagreement and
controversy.



The complexities in Darwin’s presentation of his central
principle over the six editions of the published 
Origin

served historically to generate several different readings of his
text. In the initial introduction of the principle of natural
selection in the first edition of Darwin’s text, it is
characterized as “preservation of favourable variations and the
rejection of injurious variations” (ibid., 81). When Darwin
elaborated on this concept in Chapter Four of the first edition, he
continued to describe natural selection in language suggesting that it
involved intentional selection, continuing the strong art-nature
analogy found in the manuscripts. For example:





As man can produce and certainly has produced a great result by his
methodical and unconscious means of selection, what may not nature
effect? Man can act only on external and visible characters: nature
cares nothing for appearances, except in so far as they may be useful
to any being. She can act on every internal organ, on every shade of
constitutional difference, on the whole machinery of life. Man selects
only for his own good; Nature only for that of the being which she
tends. Every selected character is fully exercised by her; and the
being is placed under well-suited conditions of life. (Ibid., 83)





The manuscript history behind such passages prevents the simple
discounting of these statements as mere rhetorical imagery. As we have
seen, the parallel between intentional human selectivity and that of
“nature” formed the proportional analogical model upon
which the concept of natural selection was originally constructed.



Criticisms that quickly developed over the overt intentionality
embedded in such passages, however, led Darwin to revise the argument
in editions beginning with the third edition of 1861. From this point
onward he explicitly downplayed the intentional and teleological
language of the first two editions, denying that his appeals to the
selective role of “nature” were anything more than a
literary figure. Darwin then moved decisively in the direction of
defining natural selection as the description of the action of natural
laws working upon organisms rather than as an efficient or final cause
of life. He also regrets in his 
Correspondence
 his mistake in
not utilizing the designation “natural preservation”
rather than “natural selection” to characterize his
principle (letter to Lyell 28 September 1860, Burkhardt

Correspondence
 8, 397; also see Darwin Correspondence Project
in
 
Other Internet Resources
).
 In response to criticisms of Alfred Russel Wallace, Darwin then
adopted in the fifth edition of 1869 his contemporary
(1820–1903) Herbert Spencer’s designator, “survival
of the fittest”, as a synonym for “natural
selection” (Spencer 1864, 444–45; Darwin 1869, 72). This
redefinition further shifted the meaning of natural selection away
from the concept that can be extracted from the early texts and
drafts. These final statements of the late 1860s and early 70s
underlie the tradition of later “mechanistic” and
non-teleological understandings of natural selection, a reading
developed by his disciples who, in the words of David Depew,
“had little use for either his natural theodicy or his image of
a benignly scrutinizing selection” (Depew 2009, 253). The degree
to which this change preserved the original strong analogy between art
and nature can, however, be questioned. Critics of the use of this
analogy had argued since the original formulations that the comparison
of the two modes of selection actually worked against Darwin’s
theory (Wallace 1858 in Glick and Kohn 1997, 343). This critique would
also be leveled against Darwin in the critical review of 1867 by Henry
Fleeming Jenkin discussed below.



The conceptual synthesis of Chapter Four also introduced discussions
of such matters as the conditions under which natural selection most
optimally worked, the role of isolation, the causes of the extinction
of species, and the principle of divergence. Many of these points were
made through the imaginative use of “thought experiments”
in which Darwin constructed possible scenarios through which natural
selection could bring about substantial change.



One prominent way Darwin captured for the reader the complexity of
this process is reflected in the single diagram to appear in all the
editions of the 
Origin
. In this illustration, originally
located as an Appendix to the first edition, but thereafter moved into
Chapter Four, Darwin summarized his conception of how species were
formed and diverged from common ancestral points. This image also
served to depict the frequent extinction of most lineages, an issue
developed in detail in Chapter Ten. It displayed pictorially the
principle of divergence, illustrating the general tendency of
populations to diverge and fragment under the pressure of population
increase. It supplied a way of envisioning relations of taxonomic
affinity to time, and illstrated the persistence of some forms
unchanged over long geological periods in which stable conditions
prevail.








Figure:
 Tree of life diagram from

Origin of Species
 (
Origin

1859:“Appendix”.





Remarkable about Darwin’s diagram of the tree of life is the
relativity of its coordinates. It is first presented as applying only
to the divergences taking place in taxa at the species level, with
varieties represented by the small lower-case letters within species
A–L of a “wide ranging genus”, with the horizontal
lines representing time segments measured in terms of a limited number
of generations. However, the attentive reader could quickly see that
Darwin’s destructive analysis of the distinction between
“natural” and “artificial” species in Chapter
Two, implied the relativity of the species-variety distinction, this
diagram could represent eventually all organic relationships, from
those at the non-controversial level of diverging varieties within
fixed species, to those of the relations of Species within different
genera. Letters A–L could also represent taxa at the level of
genera, families or orders. The diagram can thus be applied to
relationships between all levels of the Linnaean hierarchy with the
time segments representing potentially vast expanses of time, and the
horizontal spread of branches the degree of taxonomic divergence over
time. In a very few pages of argument, the diagram was generalized to
represent the most extensive group relations, encompassing the whole
of geological time. Extension of the dotted lines at the bottom could
even suggest, as Darwin argues in the last paragraph of the

Origin
, that all life was a result of “several powers,
having been originally breathed into a few forms or into one”
(Darwin 1859 [1964], 490). This could suggest a single naturalistic
origin of all original forms either by material emergence, or through
the action of a vitalistic power of life. Darwin’s use of
Biblical language could also be read as allowing for the action of a
supernatural cause.



In response to criticisms concerning this latter point, Darwin quickly
added to the final paragraph in the second edition of 1860 the phrase
“by the Creator” (1860: 484), which remained in all
subsequent editions. as did the quotations on the frontispiece from
familiar discussions in British natural theology concerning creation
by secondary causation. Conceptual space was thereby created for the
reading of the 
Origin
 by some contemporaries, notably by the
Harvard botanist Asa Gray (1810–88), as compatible with
traditional natural theology (Gray 1860).



The sweep of the theoretical generalization that closed the natural
selection chapter, one restated even more generally in the final
paragraph of the book, required Darwin to deal with several obvious
objections to the theory that constitute the main
“defensive” chapters of the 
Origin

(Five–Nine), and occupy him through the numerous revisions of
the text between 1859 and 1872. As suggested by David Depew, the
rhetorical structure of the original text developed in an almost
“objections and response” structure that resulted in a
constant stream of revisions to various editions of the original text
as Darwin engaged his opponents (Depew 2009; Peckham 2006).
Anticipating at first publication several obvious lines of objection,
Darwin devoted much of the text of the original 
Origin
 to
offering a solution in advance to predictable difficulties. As Darwin
outlined these main lines of objection, he discussed, first, the
apparent absence of numerous slight gradations between species, both
in the present and in the fossil record, of the kind that would seem
to be predictable from the gradualist workings of the theory (Chps.
Six, Nine). Second, the gradual development of organs and structures
of extreme complexity, such as the vertebrate eye, an organ which had
since Antiquity served as a mainstay of the argument for external
teleological design (Chp. Six). Third, the evolution of the elaborate
instincts of animals and the puzzling problem of the evolution of
social insects that developed sterile neuter castes, proved to be a
particularly difficult issue for Darwin in the manuscript phase of his
work and needed some account (Chp. Seven). As a fourth major issue
needing attention, the traditional distinction between natural species
defined by interfertility, and artificial species defined by
morphological differences, required an additional chapter of analysis
in which he sought to undermine the absolute character of the
interbreeding criterion as a sign of fixed natural species (Chp.
Eight).



In Chapter Ten, Darwin developed his interpretation of the fossil
record. At issue was the claim by Lamarckian and other transformists,
as well as Cuvierian catastrophists such as William Buckland
(1784–1856) (see the entry on
 
evolutionary thought before Darwin
,
 Section 4.1), that the fossil record displayed a historical sequence
beginning with simpler plants and animals, arriving either by
transformism or replacement, at the appearance of more complex forms
in geological history. Opposition to this thesis of “geological
progressionism” had been made by none other than Darwin’s
great mentor in geology, Charles Lyell in his 
Principles of
Geology
 (Lyell 1832 [1990], vol. 2, chp. xi; Desmond 1984; Bowler
1976). Darwin defended the progressionist view against Lyell’s
arguments in this chapter.



To each of the lines of objection to his theory, Darwin offered his
contemporaries plausible replies. Additional arguments were worked out
through the insertion of numerous textual insertions over the five
revisions of the 
Origin
 between 1860 and 1872, including the
addition of a new chapter to the sixth edition dealing with
“miscellaneous” objections, responding primarily to the
criticisms of St. George Jackson Mivart (1827–1900) developed in
his 
Genesis of Species
 (Mivart 1871).



For reasons related both to the condensed and summary form of public
presentation, and also as a reflection of the bold conceptual sweep of
the theory, the primary argument of the 
Origin
 could not gain
its force from the data presented by the book itself. Instead, it
presented an argument from unifying simplicity, gaining its force and
achieving assent from the ability of Darwin’s theory to draw
together in its final synthesizing chapters (Ten–Thirteen) a
wide variety of issues in taxonomy, comparative anatomy, paleontology,
biogeography, and embryology under the simple principles worked out in
the first four chapters. This “consilience” argument might
be seen as the best reflection of the impact of William
Whewell’s methodology (see above).



As Darwin envisioned the issue, with the acceptance of his theory,
“a grand untrodden field of inquiry will be opened” in
natural history. The long-standing issues of species origins, if not
the the explanation of the ultimate origins of life, as well as the
causes of their extinction, had been brought within the domain of
naturalistic explanation. It is in this context that he makes the sole
reference in the text to the claim that “light will be thrown on
the origin of man and his history”. And in a statement that will
foreshadow the important issues of the 
Descent of Man
 of
1871, he speaks of how “Psychology will be based on a new
foundation, that of the necessary acquirement of each mental power and
capacity by gradation” (ibid., 488)


3. The Reception of the 
Origin


3.1 The Popular Reception of Darwin’s Theory



The broad sweep of Darwin’s claims, the brevity of the empirical
evidence actually supplied in the 
Origin
, and the
implications of his theory for several more general philosophical and
theological issues, opened up a controversy over Darwinian evolution
that has waxed and waned over more than 160 years. The theory was
inserted into a complex set of different national and cultural
receptions the study of which currently forms a scholarly industry in
its own right. European, Latin American and Anglophone receptions have
been most deeply studied (Bowler 2013a; Gayon 2013; Largent 2013;
Glick 1988, 2013; Glick and Shaffer 2014; Engels and Glick 2008;
Gliboff 2008; Numbers 1998; Pancaldi, 1991; Todes 1989; Kelly 1981;
Hull 1973; Mullen 1964). To these have been added analyses of
non-Western recptions (Jin 2020, 2019 a,b; Yang 2013; Shen 2016;
Elshakry 2013; Pusey 1983). These analyses display common patterns in
both Western and non-Western readings of Darwin’s theory, in
which these receptions were conditioned, if not determined, by the
pre-existing intellectual, scientific, religious, social, and
political contexts into which his works were inserted.



In the anglophone world, Darwin’s theory fell into a complex
social environment that in the United States meant into the pre-Civil
War slavery debates (Largent 2013; Numbers 1998). In the United
Kingdom it was issued against the massive industrial expansion of
mid-Victorian society, and the development of professionalized
science. To restrict focus to aspects of the British reading public
context, the pre-existing popularity of the anonymous 
Vestiges of
the Natural History of Creation
 of 1844, which had reached 11
editions and sold 23,350 copies by December of 1860 (Secord
“Introduction” to Chambers 1844 [1994], xxvii]), with more
editions to appear by the end of the century, certainly prepared the
groundwork for the general notion of the evolutionary origins of
species by the working of secondary natural laws. The

Vestiges
’s grand schema of a teleological development
of life, from the earliest beginnings of the solar system in a gaseous
nebula to the emergence of humanity under the action of a great
“law of development”, had also been popularized for
Victorian readers by Alfred Lord Tennyson’s epic poem 
In
Memoriam
 (1850). This 
Vestiges
 backdrop provided a
context in which some could read Darwin as supplying additional
support for the belief in an optimistic historical development of life
under teleological guidance of secondary laws with the promise of
ultimate historical redemption. Such readings also rendered the

Origin
 seemingly compatible with the progressive evolutionism
of Darwin’s contemporary Herbert Spencer (see the entry on
 
Herbert Spencer
).
 Because of these similarities, Spencer’s writings served as an
important vehicle by which Darwin’s views, modified to fit the
progressivist views expounded by Spencer, were first introduced in
non-Western contexts (Jin 2020, 2019 a,b; Lightman [ed.] 2015; Pusey
1983). Such popular receptions ignored or revised Darwin’s
concept of evolution by natural selection to fit these progressivist
alternatives.



Outside the United Kingdom, the receptions of Darwin’s work
display the importance of local context and pre-existent intellectual
and social conditions. Three examples—France, Germany, and
China—can be elaborated upon. In France, Darwin’s theory
was received against the background of the prior debates over
transformism of the 1830s that pitted the theories of Lamarck and
Etienne Geoffroy St. Hilaire against Cuvier (Gayon 2013; entry on
 
evolutionary thought before Darwin
,
 4.1). At least within official French Academic science, these debates
had been resolved generally in favor of Cuvier’s
anti-transformism. The intellectual framework provided by the
“positive philosophy” of Auguste Comte (1798–1857)
also worked both for and against Darwin. On one hand, Comte’s
emphasis on the historical progress of science over superstition and
metaphysics allowed Darwin to be summoned in support of a theory of
the progress of science. The 
Origin
 was so interpreted in the
preface to the first French translation of the 
Origin
 made by
Clémence Royer (Harvey 2008). On the other hand, the Comtean
three stages view of history, with its claim of the historical
transcendence of speculative and metaphysical periods of science by a
final period of experimental science governed by determinate laws,
placed Darwinism in a metaphysical phase of speculative nature
philosophy. This view is captured by the assessment of the leading
physiologist and methodologist of French Science, Claude Bernard
(1813–78). As he stated this in his 1865 treatise on scientific
methodology, Darwin’s theory was to be regarded with those of
“a Goethe, an Oken, a Carus, a Geoffroy Saint Hilaire”,
locating it within speculative philosophy of nature rather than
granting it the status of “positive” science (Bernard 1865
[1957], 91–92]).



In the Germanies, Darwin’s work entered a complex social,
intellectual and political situation in the wake of the failed efforts
to establish a liberal democracy in 1848. It also entered an
intellectual culture strongly influenced by the pre-existent
philosophical traditions of Kant, Schelling’s

Naturphilosophie
, German Romanticism, and the Idealism of
Fichte and Hegel (R. J. Richards 2002, 2008, 2013; Gliboff 2007, 2008;
Mullen 1964). These factors formed a complex political and
philosophical environment into which Darwin’s developmental view
of nature and theory of the transformation of species was quickly
assimilated, if also altered. Many readings of Darwin consequently
interpreted his arguments against the background of Schelling’s
philosophy of nature. The marshalling of Darwin’s authority in
debates over scientific materialism were also brought to the fore by
the enthusiastic advocacy of Darwinism in Germany by University of
Jena professor of zoology Ernst Heinrich Haeckel (1834–1919).
More than any other individual, Haeckel made 
Darwinismus
 a
major player in the polarized political and religious disputes of
Bismarckian Germany (R. J. Richards 2008). Through his polemical
writings, such as the 
Natural History of Creation
 (1868),

Anthropogeny
 (1874), and 
Riddle of the Universe

(1895–99), Haeckel advocated a materialist monism in the name of
Darwin, and used this as a stick with which to beat traditional
religion. Much of the historical conflict between religious
communities and evolutionary biology can be traced back to
Haeckel’s polemical writings, which went through numerous
editions and translations, including several English and American
editions that appeared into the early decades of the twentieth
century.



To turn to a very different context, that of China, Darwin’s
works entered Chinese discussions by a curious route. The initial
discussions of Darwinian theory were generated by the translation of
Thomas Henry Huxley’s 1893 Romanes Lecture “Evolution and
Ethics” by the naval science scholar Yan Fu (1854–1921),
who had encountered Darwinism while being educated at the Royal Naval
College in Greenwich from 1877 to 1879. This translation of
Huxley’s lecture, published in 1898 under the name of

Tianyan Lun
, was accompanied with an extensive commentary by
Yan Fu that drew heavily upon the writings of Herbert Spencer which
Yan Fu placed in opposition to the arguments of Huxley. This work has
been shown to have been the main vehicle by which the Chinese learned
indirectly of Darwin’s theory (Jin 2020, 2019 a, b; Yang 2013;
Pusey 1983). In the interpretation of Yan Fu and his allies, such as
Kan Yuwei (1858–1927), Darwinism was given a progressivist
interpretation in line with aspects of Confucianism.



Beginning in 1902, a second phase of Darwinian reception began with a
partial translation of the first five chapters of the sixth edition of
the 
Origin
 by the Chinese scientist, trained in chemistry and
metallurgy in Japan and Germany, Ma Junwu (1881–1940). This
partial translation, published between 1902 and 1906, again modified
the text itself to agree with the progressive evolutionism of Spencer
and with the progressivism already encountered in Yan Fu’s
popular 
Tianyan Lun.
 Only in September of 1920 did the
Chinese have Ma Junwu’s full translation of Darwin’s sixth
edition. This late translation presented a more faithful rendering of
Darwin’s text, including an accurate translation of
Darwin’s final views on natural selection (Jin 2019 a, b). As a
political reformer and close associate of democratic reformer Sun
Yat-Sen (1866–1925), Ma Junwu’s interest in translating
Darwin was also was involved with his interest in revolutionary
Chinese politics (Jin 2019a, 2022).


3.2 The Professional Reception of Darwin’s Theory



The reception of the 
Origin
 by those who held positions of
professional research and teaching positions in universities,
leadership positions in scientific societies, and employment in
museums, was complex. These individuals were typically familiar with
the empirical evidence and the technical scientific issues under
debate in the 1860s in geology, comparative anatomy, embryology,
biogeography, and classification theory. This group can usually be
distinguished from lay interpreters who may not have made distinctions
between the views of Lamarck, Chambers, Schelling, Spencer, and Darwin
on the historical development of life.



If we concentrate attention on the reception by these professionals,
Darwin’s work received varied endorsement (Hull 1973). Many
prominent members of Darwin’s immediate intellectual
circle—Adam Sedgwick, William Whewell, Charles Lyell, Richard
Owen, and Thomas Huxley—had previously been highly critical of
Chambers’s 
Vestiges
 in the 1840s for its speculative
character and its scientific incompetence (Secord 2000). Darwin
himself feared a similar reception, and he recognized the substantial
challenge facing him in convincing this group and the larger community
of scientific specialists with which he interacted and corresponded
widely. With this group he was only partially successful.



Historical studies have revealed that only rarely did members of the
scientific elites accept and develop Darwin’s theories exactly
as they were presented in his texts. Statistical studies on the
reception by the scientific community in England in the first decade
after the publication of the 
Origin
 have shown a complicated
picture in which there was neither wide-spread conversion of the
scientific community to Darwin’s views, nor a clear generational
stratification between younger converts and older resisters, counter
to Darwin’s own predictions in the final chapter of the

Origin
 (Hull et al. 1978). These studies also reveal a
distinct willingness within the scientific community to separate
acceptance of Darwin’s more general claim of species descent
with modification from common ancestors from the endorsement of his
explanation of this descent through the action of natural selection on
slight morphological variations.



Of central importance in analyzing this complex professional reception
was the role assigned by Darwin to the importance of normal individual
variation as the source of evolutionary novelty. As we have seen,
Darwin had relied on the novel claim that small individual
variations—the kind of differences considered by an earlier
tradition as merely “accidental”—formed the raw
material upon which, by cumulative directional change under the action
of natural selection, major changes could be produced sufficient to
explain the origin and subsequent differences in all the various forms
of life over time. Darwin, however, left the specific causes of this
variation unspecified beyond some effect of the environment on the
sexual organs. Variation was presented in the 
Origin
 with the
statement that “the laws governing inheritance are quite
unknown” (Darwin 1859 [1964], 13). In keeping with his
commitment to the gradualism of Lyellian geology, Darwin also rejected
the role of major “sports” or other sources of
discontinuous change in this process.



As critics focused their attacks on the claim that such
micro-differences between individuals could be accumulated over time
without natural limits, Darwin began a series of modifications and
revisions of the theory through a back and forth dialogue with his
critics that can be followed in his revisions to the text of the

Origin
. In the fourth edition of 1866, for example, Darwin
inserted the claim that the continuous gradualism depicted by his
branching diagram was misleading, and that transformative change does
not necessarily go on continuously. “It is far more probable
that each form remains for long periods unaltered, and then again
undergoes modification” (Darwin 1866, 132; Peckham 2006, 213).
This change-stasis-change model allowed variation to stabilize for a
period of time around a mean value from which additional change could
then resume. Such a model would, however, presumably require even more
time for its working than the multi-millions of years assumed in the
original presentation of the theory.



The difficulties in Darwin’s arguments that had emerged by 1866
were highlighted in a lengthy and telling critique in 1867 by the
Scottish engineer Henry Fleeming Jenkin (1833–1885) (typically
Fleeming Jenkin). Using an argument previously raised in the 1830s by
Charles Lyell against Lamarck, Fleeming Jenkin cited empirical
evidence from domestic breeding that suggested a distinct limitation
on the degree to which normal variation could be added upon by
selection (Fleeming Jenkin 1867 in Hull 1973). Using a loosely
mathematical argument, Fleeming Jenkin argued that the effects of
intercrossing would continuously swamp deviations from the mean values
of characters and result in a tendency of the variation in a
population to return to mean values over time. It is also argued that
domestic evidence does not warrant an argument for species change. For
Fleeming Jenkin, Darwin’s reliance on continuous additive
deviation was presumed to be undermined by these arguments, and only
more dramatic and discontinuous change—something Darwin
explicitly rejected—could account for the origin of new
species.



Fleeming Jenkin also argued that the time needed by Darwin’s
theory to account for the history of life under the gradual working of
natural selection was simply unavailable from scientific evidence,
supporting this claim by an appeal to the physical calculations of the
probable age of the solar system presented in publications by his
mentor, the Glasgow physicist William Thompson (Lord Kelvin,
1824–1907) (Burchfield 1975). On the basis of Thompson’s
quantitative physical arguments concerning the age of the sun and
solar system, Fleeming Jenkin judged the time since the presumed first
beginnings of life to be insufficient for the Darwinian gradualist
theory of species transformation to have taken place.



Jenkin’s multi-pronged argument gave Darwin considerable
difficulties and set the stage for more detailed empirical inquiries
into variation and its causes by Darwin’s successors. The time
difficulties were only resolved in the twentieth-century with the
discovery of radioactivity that could explain why the sun did not lose
heat in accord with Newtonian principles.



As a solution to the variation question, Darwin developed his
“provisional hypothesis” of pangenesis, which he presented
the year after the appearance of the Fleeming Jenkin review in his
two-volume 
Variation of Plants and Animals Under
Domestication
 (Darwin 1868; Olby 2013). Although this theory had
been formulated independently of the Jenkin review (Olby 1963), in
effect it functioned as Darwin’s reply to Jenkin’s
critique. The pangenesis theory offered a causal theory of variation
and inheritance through a return to a theory resembling Buffon’s
theory of the organic molecules proposed in the previous century (see
entry on
 
evolutionary thought before Darwin

 section 3.2). Invisible material “gemmules” were presumed
to exist within the cells. According to theory, these were subject to
external alteration by the environment and other external causes. The
gemmules were then shed continually into the blood stream (the
“transport” hypothesis) and assembled by “mutual
affinity for each other, leading to their aggregation either into buds
or into the sexual elements” (Darwin 1868, vol. 2, 375). In this
form they were then transmitted—the details were not
explained—by sexual generation to the next generation to form
the new organism out of “the modified physiological units of
which the organism is built” (ibid., 377). In Darwin’s
view, this hypothesis united together numerous issues into a coherent
and causal theory of inheritance and explained the basis of variation.
It also explained how use-disuse inheritance, a theory which Darwin
never abandoned, could work.



The pangenesis theory, although not specifically referred to, seems to
be behind an important distinction Darwin inserted into the fifth
edition of the 
Origin
 of 1869 in his direct reply to the
criticisms of Jenkin. In this textual revision, Darwin distinguished
“certain variations, which no one would rank as mere individual
differences”, from ordinary variations (Darwin1869, 105; Peckham
2006, 178–179). This revision shifted Darwin’s emphasis
away from his early reliance on normal slight individual variation,
and gave new status to what he now termed “strongly
marked” variations. The latter were now the forms of variation
to be given primary evolutionary significance. Presumably this strong
variation was more likely to be transmitted to the offspring, although
details are left unclear, and in this form major variation could
presumably be maintained in a population against the tendency to
swamping by intercrossing as Fleeming Jenkin had argued.



Darwin’s struggles over this issue defined a set of problems
that British life scientists in particular were to deal with into the
1930s. These debates over the role of somatic variation in the
evolutionary process placed Darwinism in a defensive posture that
forced its supporters into major revisions in the Darwinian research
program (Gayon 1998; Vorzimmer 1970). The consequence was a complex
period of Darwinian history in which natural selection theory was
rejected by many research, or defended in modified form by others
(Bowler 1983, 2013a; Largent 2009).


4. Human Evolution and the 
Descent of Man


4.1 The Genesis of Darwin’s 
Descent



Darwin had retained his own conclusions on human evolution quietly in
the background through the 1860’s while the defense of his
general theory was conducted by advocates as diverse as Thomas Henry
Huxley (1825–95) in England, Asa Gray (1810–88) in the
United States, and Ernst Haeckel (1834–1919) in the emerging new
Germany. Darwin’s own position on the “human
question” remained unclear to the reading public, and his
rhetorical situating of the 
Origin
 within a tradition of
divine creation by secondary law, captured in the frontispiece
quotations from William Whewell and Francis Bacon, allowed many before
1871 to see Darwin as more open to religious interpretations of human
origins than those of some of his popularizers.



Darwin’s interest in developing his insights into the origins of
human beings and the explanation of human properties through descent
with modification was, however, evident in his correspondence as early
as January of 1860 when he began collecting evidence on the
expressions of the emotions in human beings (Browne 2002, chp. 9). He
then developed a questionnaire specifically intended to gain such
information from contacts in Patagonia and Tierra del Fuego (Radick
2018). Further engagement with these issues was then generated by the
discussions of Lyell (1863) and A. R. Wallace (1864), both of whom
suggested that natural selection could not account for the development
of the “higher” rational faculties, language, and ethical
motivation (R. J. Richards 1987, chp. 4). It was then in February of
1867 that Darwin decided to remove material from his massive
manuscript of the 
Variation of Plants and Animals Under
Domestication
 to create a “very small volume, ‘an
essay on the origin of mankind’” (Darwin to Hooker, 8
February 1867 and CD to Turner, 11 February 1867, Burkhardt,

Correspondence
 15: 74, 80). At this time he also sent to
several international correspondents a more detailed questionnaire
asking for information on human emotional expression. Further impetus
to develop his views was created by the arguments of William R. Greg
(1809–1881) in an essay in 
Fraser’s Magazine

(1868), with further support by arguments of A. R. Wallace in 1869,
both of whom drew a sharp distinction between human properties and
those of animals (R. J. Richards 1987, 172–184). These arguments
denied that natural selection could explain the origins of these
“higher powers”.



Darwin’s drafting of his views on human issues, begun in early
1868, expanded into a major enterprise in which he became deeply
engaged with the issue of the implications of his theory for ethics.
The result of this effort devoted to anthropological topics was two
separate works: the 
Descent of Man and Selection in Relation to
Sex
, delivered to the publisher in June of 1870 with publication
in 1871, and its companion, 
Expression of the Emotions in Man and
Animals
, which he commenced in early 1871 with publication in
early 1872.



As commentators have noted, these two works differ markedly in their
arguments, and reflect different relationships to Darwin’s
causal theories of natural and sexual selection, with sexual selection
predominting over natural selection for the major portion of the

Descent
, and both of these causal theories generally missing
from the descriptive approach of the 
Expression
 (Radick
2018).



Sexual selection—the choosing of females by males or vice versa
for breeding purposes—had received a general statement by Darwin
in Chapter IV of the 
Origin
, but this played only a minor
role in the original argument, and its importance was denied by
co-evolutionist A. R. Wallace. In the 
Descent
 this was now
developed in extensive detail as a major factor in evolution that
could even work against ordinary natural selection. Sexual selection
could be marshaled to explain sexual dimorphism, and also the presence
of unusual characters and properties of organisms—elaborate
feeding organs, bright colors, and other seemingly maladaptive
structures such as the antlers on the Irish Elk or the great horn on
the Rhinoceros beetle—that would appear anomalous outcomes of
ordinary natural selection working for the optimal survival of
organisms in nature. In a dramatic extension of the principle to human
beings, the combination of natural and sexual selection is used to
explain the origins of human beings from simian ancestors. It also
accounts for the sexual dimorphism in humans, and is a major factor
accounting for the origin of human races (E. Richards 2017; R. A.
Richards 2013).


4.2 Darwin on Mental Powers



Although the secondary causal role of sexual selection in the
development of species generally was to be the main topic of the bulk
of the 
Descent
, this plays an ambiguous role initially in the
“treatise on man” that occupies the initial chapters, and
functions differently in his treatment of the origins of mental
powers, the moral sense, and the origin of races in this opening
discussion.



In constructing this presentation, Darwin reaches back to the early
Notebooks that he had separated out from the
“transformist” discussions to deal with his inquiries into
ethics, psychology, and emotions (see Section 1.2 above). Of
particular importance for the opening discussions of the

Descent
 was the “M” notebook, commenced in July
of 1838, and “N”, begun in October of that year. On
occasion he also samples the collection of entries now entitled
“Old and Useless Notes”, generally written between 1838
and 1840.



The initial topic of focus in the 
Descent
 deals with the
far-reaching issues concerning the status and origin of human mental
properties, faculties presumed traditionally to be possessed uniquely
by human beings. These properties Darwin now places on an evolutionary
continuum with those features of animal behavior long regarded as
instinctual. In this he placed himself in opposition to the long
tradition of discourse that had distinguished humans from animals due
to the the possession of a “rational principle” related to
their possession of a rational soul. This tradition had been given a
more radical foundation in the revolutionary reflections on the
relation of mind and body initiated by René Descartes
(1596–1650) in the middle of the seventeenth century. Descartes
deepened this distinction with the separation of the two
substances—thinking substance, or 
res cogitans
,
possessed only by humans, and extended material substance, 
res
extensa
 that constituted the rest of the natural world, including
animals and plants, rendering animals only lifeless machines without
rational faculties.



Darwin’s collapse of this Cartesian barrier with his theory of
human origins outlined in the 
Descent
 continued a discussion
that had been a concern of his transformist predecessors, especially
Jean Baptiste Lamarck (Sloan 1999). But Darwin took this issue to a
new level as he interpreted the human-animal relationship in the
context of his novel theory of divergent evolution from common
ancestors. Darwin also broke with the view of humans as the summit of
a natural teleological process. Darwin instead denies such
teleological ordering, and effectively reduces human properties to
those of animals—mental as well as physical—by tracing
them to their origin in properties of lower organisms.



The warrant for the identification of human and animal mental
properties, however, is not supported by substantial argumentation in
the 
Descent.
 The opening discussions of the treatise
summarize the 
anatomical
 evidence for
“homologies” —true identities—between humans
and animals due to descent from common ancestors, claims already set
out in Chapter Thirteen of the 
Origin.
 But the transferal of
this identity of structure to inner 
non-anatomical

“mental” properties rested on premises that are not made
explicit in this text, and were not identities drawn by Huxley,
Wallace and Lyell, for example, in their treatments of humans in
relation to evolutionary theory, although they acknowledged the
anatomical continuities.



To understand Darwin’s arguments, it is useful to return to his
Notebook discussions on which he was drawing for his reasoning (see
above, Section 1.2). In his “C” Notebook, opened in
February of 1838, Darwin has a remarkable entry that displays very
early on his commitment to a metaphysical
“monism”—the thesis that there is only one substance
underlying both mind and body. With this goes the thesis of a
parallelism of the complexity of mental properties with those of
material structure. In this entry in “C” following on
Darwin’s reflections on the issue of instinct, and also
recording some of his observations on animals at the Regents Park
zoological gardens, Darwin comments:



There is one living spirit, prevalent over this wor[l]d, (subject to
certain contingencies of organic matter & chiefly heat), which
assumes a multitude of forms <<each having acting
principle>> according to subordinate laws.—There is one
thinking […] principle (intimately allied to one kind of
organic matter—brain. & which <prin> thinking
principle. seems to be given or assumed according to a more extended
relations [
sic
] of the individuals, whereby choice with
memory, 
or reason
? is necessary.—) which is modified
into endless forms, bearing a close relation in degree & kind to
the endless forms of the living beings.— We see thus Unity in
thinking and acting principle in the various shades of <dif>
separation between those individuals thus endowed, & the community
of mind, even in the tendency to delicate emotions between races,
& recurrent habits in animals.— (Barrett 1987, 305)




As we follow these issues into the “M” Notebook, the
assumption of a single “thinking principle,” allied to one
kind of organic matter, seems then to underlie Darwin’s
subsequent reflections on mind and matter. The “M”
Notebook cites numerous “mental”properties common to
humans and animals that generally parallel levels of material
organization, similar to the identities expressed in the later

Descent.
 The range of this universal extension of mental
properties is far-reaching in these early discussions: consciousness
and “free will” extends to all animals, including
invertebrates:





With respect to free will, seeing a puppy playing cannot doubt that
they have free will, if so all animals., then an oyster has & a
polype (& a plant in some senses […]; now free will of
oyster, one can fancy to be direct effect of organization, by the
capacities its senses give it of pain or pleasure, if so free will is
to mind, what chance is to matter […] (Barrett 1987, 536).





When these themes reappear in Chapter Two of the first edition of the

Descent
, Darwin seems to draw implicitly upon this
matter-mind identity theory as an obvious consequence of his theory of
descent from common ancestry. There he enumerates a long list of
traditional human mental and emotional properties to claim that each
of them are identities with the properties of simpler forms of life.
The list is expansive: courage, deceit, play, kindness, maternal
affection, self-complacency, pride, shame, sense of honor, wonder,
dread, imitation, imagination, and dreaming. All are considered to be
represented in a wide range of animals, with “play”and
“recognition” found even in the ants.



When he addresses the more complex mental properties that specifically
had been considered by a long tradition of discussion to be the
distinctive human properties—possession of language, reason,
abstract conceptual thinking, self-reflection—these again are
treated as having their manifestations in other forms of life, with
none of them unique to human beings. Language, the property that
Descartes, for example, had considered to be the primary
distinguishing character denoting the human possession of mind as
distinct from matter, Darwin treats a developing in a gradual process
from animal sounds that parallel the differentiation of species,
illustrated by the fact that languages “like organic beings, can
be classed in groups under groups” (Darwin 1871 [1981], 60). He
closes his discussion of mental powers with an analysis of religious
belief that derives it from imagination and belief in spirits found in
aboriginal peoples. It can even be homologized with the “deep
love of a dog for his master, associated with complete submissions,
some fear, and perhaps other feelings” (ibid., 68).
Darwin’s discussions of the relation of human and animal mental
and emotional properties would set the agenda for a complex discussion
that would carry into contemporary debates over animal cognition and
the relations of human and animal properties (see the entries on
 
animal cognition
;
 
methods in comparative cognition
; and
 
animal consciousness
).


4.3 The Ethical Theory of the 
Descent of Man



The subsequent treatment of ethical issues in the third chapter of the

Descent
 was for Darwin a topic to be approached
“exclusively from the side of natural history” (ibid.,
71). This issue also presented him with some of his most difficult
conceptual problems (CD to Gray, 15 March 1870, Burkhardt,

Correspondence
 18, 68). In this discussion he also employs
natural selection theory as an explanatory cause.



Under the heading of “Moral Sense”, Darwin offered some
innovations in ethics that do not easily map on to standard ethical
positions classified around the familiar categories of Rule or Act
Utilitarianism, Kantian Deontology, Hedonism, and Emotivism.
Darwin’s closest historical affinities are with the Scottish
“Moral Sense” tradition of Frances Hutcheson
(1694–1746), Adam Smith (1723?–1790), and David Hume
(1711–1776). More immediately Darwin drew from the expositions
of the moral sense theory by his distant relative, Sir James Macintosh
(1765–1832) (R. J. Richards 1987, 114–122, 206–219).



Traditional moral sense theory linked ethical behavior to an innate
property that was considered to be universal in human beings, although
it required education and cultivation to reach its full expression
(see the entry on
 
moral sentimentalism
).
 This inherent property, or “moral” sense, presumably
explained such phenomena as ethical conscience, the sense of moral
duty, and it accounted for altruistic actions that could not be
reduced to hedonic seeking of pleasure and avoiding pain. It also did
not involve the rational calculation of advantage, or the maximization
of greatest happiness by an individual prior to action, as implied by
Utilitarianism. For this reason Darwin criticized John Stuart
Mill’s version of Utilitarian theory because it relied on
acquired habits and the calculation of advantage (Darwin 1871 [1981],
71n5).



Darwin’s reinterpretation of the moral sense tradition within
his evolutionary framework also implied important transfomations of
this theory of ethics. The moral sense was not to be distinguished
from animal instinct but was instead derived historically from the
social instincts and developed by natural selection. From this
perspective, Darwin could claim a genuine identity of ethical
foundations holding between humans and animals, with the precursors of
human ethical behavior found in the behavior of other animals,
particularly those with social organization. Natural selection then
shaped these ethical instincts in ways that favored group survival
over immediate individual benefit (ibid., 98). Human ethical behavior
is therefore grounded in a natural property developed by natural
selection, with the consequence that ethical actions can occur without
moral calculus or rational deliberation.



When moral conflict occurs, this is generally attributed to a conflict
of instincts, with the stronger of two conflicting instincts favored
by natural selection insofar as it favors group benefit (ibid. 84). In
human beings the “more enduring Social Instincts” thus
come to override the less persistent “individual”
instincts.



The adequacy of evolutionary ethical naturalism as a foundation for
ethical realism proved to be a point of contention for Darwin’s
contemporaries and successors following the publication of the

Descent
. For some moral philosophers, Darwin had simply
reduced ethics to a property subject to the relativizing tendencies of
natural selection (Farber 1994: chp. 5). It was, in the view of
Darwin’s philosophical critics, to reduce ethics to biology and
in doing so, to offer no way to distinguish ethical goods from
survival advantages. Not even for some strong supporters of Darwinism,
such as Thomas Huxley and Alfred Russel Wallace, was Darwin’s
account adequate (ibid., chp. 4). Much of subsequent development of
moral philosophy after Darwin would be grounded upon the canonical
acceptance of the “is-ought” distinction, which emerged
with new force from the critique of “evolutionary” ethical
theory. This critique began with Thomas Huxley’s own break with
Darwinian ethical theory in his Romanes Lecture, “Evolution and
Ethics”of 1893 (Huxley 1893). This lecture, reflecting
Huxley’s views eleven years after Darwin’s death, would
play an important role in the Chinese reception of Darwinism (Huxley
1895; see above, section 3.1). This line of critique also received an
influential academic expression in G. E. Moore’s
(1873–1958) 
Principia Ethica
—itself an attack on
Spencer’s version of evolutionary ethics (Moore 1903). Debates
over the adequacy of evolutionary ethics continue into the present
(see the entries on
 
biological altruism

 and
 
morality and evolutionary biology
;
 see also, R. J. Richards 2015, 2009, 1999, 1987, Appendix 2;
Charmetant 2013; Boniolo and DeAnna (eds.) 2006; Hauser 2006; Katz
(ed.) 2000; Maienschein and Ruse (eds.) 1999).


4.4 Reception of the 
Descent



The international reception of the 
Descent of Man
 and

Expression of the Emotions
 is a topic in need of the kind of
detailed studies that surround the historical impact of the

Origin.
 These works presented the reading public after 1871
with a more radical and controversial Darwin than had been associated
with the author of the popular 
Journal of Researches
 or even
the 
Origin
 itself, and his anthropological works created a
watershed in the public reception of Darwin’s views (Radick
2013). The 
Descent
 finally made public Darwin’s more
radical conclusions about human origins, and seemed to many of his
readers, even those previously sympathetic to the 
Origin
, to
throw Darwin’s authority behind materialist and anti-religious
forces. Public knowledge of Darwin’s own conclusions on human
evolution before 1871 had rested on the one vague sentence on the
issue in the 
Origin
 itself. The 
Descent
 made public
his more radical conclusions. Even though the question of human
evolution had already been dealt with in part by Thomas Huxley in his

Man’s Place in Nature
 of 1863 (Huxley 1863), and by
Charles Lyell in the same year in his 
Geological Evidences of the
Antiquity of Man
 (Lyell 1863), followed by Alfred Russel
Wallace’s articles in 1864 and 1870 (Wallace 1864 and online),
these authors had either not dealt with the full range of questions
presented by the inclusion of human beings in the evolutionary
process, or they had emphasized the moral and mental discontinuity
between humans and animals. Only Ernst Heinrich Haeckel had drawn out
a more general reductive conception of humanity from evolutionary
theory and he had not ventured into the specific issues of ethics,
social organization, the origins of human races, and the relation of
human mental properties to those of animals, all of which are dealt
with in the 
Descent
. Darwin’s treatise presented, as
one commentator has put it, “a closer resemblance to
Darwin’s early naturalistic vision than anything else he ever
published” (Durant 1985, 294).



Darwin’s extension of his theory to a range of questions
traditionally discussed within philosophy, theology, and social and
political theory, has shaped the more general history of Darwinism
since the 1870s. It set the agenda for much of the development of
psychology of the late nineteenth century (R. J. Richards 1987). It
also hardened the opposition of many religiously-based communities
against evolutionary theory, although here again, distinctions must be
made between different communities (Ellegård 1990, chp. 14).
Such opposition was not simply based upon the denial of the literal
scriptural account of the origins of humankind, an issue that played
out differently within the main religious denominations (Haught 2013;
Finnegan 2013; Swetlitz 2013; Artigas, Glick, & Martinez 2006;
Moore 1979). The more fundamental opposition was due to the denial of
distinctions, other than those of degree, between fundamental human
properties and those of animals.



Furthermore, the apparent denial of some kind of divine guidance in
the processes behind human evolution and the non-teleological
character of Darwin’s final formulations of the natural
selection theory in the fifth and sixth editions of the

Origin
, hardened this opposition. His adoption from Herbert
Spencer of designator “survival of the fittest” as a
synonym for “natural selection” in the fifth edition of
1869 added to this growing opposition. As a consequence, the favorable
readings that many influential religious thinkers—John Henry
Newman (1801–1890) is a good example—had given to the
original 
Origin
, disappeared. The rhetoric of the

Descent
, with its conclusion that “man is descended
from a hairy quadruped, furnished with a tail and pointed ears”
(Darwin 1871 [1981], 389), presented to the public a different Darwin
than many had associated with the popular seagoing naturalist.



The new opposition to Darwin is reflected in the many hostile reviews
of the 
Descent
 to appear in the periodical press (R. J.
Richards 1987, 219–230). Particularly at issue were
Darwin’s accounts of the origin of ethical principles and
intelletual powers, including language, self-reflection, abstract
thinking and religious belief as derivations from animal properties
(Anon. 1871)



The profound revolution in thought that Darwin created, however, was
eventually recognized even by his one-time harsh critics. The once
leading British comparative anatomist Richard Owen (1804–1892),
who had long been estranged from Darwin since his harsh review of the

Origin
 in 1860, nonetheless could comment on the occasion of
Darwin’s burial in Westminster Abbey in a letter to Horace
Walpole:





The great value of Darwin’s series of works, summarizing all the
evidence of Embryology, Paleontology, & Physiology experimentally
applied in producing Varieties of Species, is exemplified in the
general acceptance by Biologists of the Secondary Law, by Evolution,
of the ‘Origin of Species’ […] In this respect
Charles Darwin stands to Biology in the relation which Copernicus
stood to Astronomy. […] [Copernicus] knew not how the planets
revolved around the sun. To know that required the successive labours
of a Galileo, a Kepler and finally a Newton […] Meanwhile our
British Copernicus of Biology merits the honour and the gratitude of
the Empire, which is manifest by a Statue in Westminster Abbey.
(Richard Owen to Horace Walpole, 5 November, 1882, Royal College of
Surgeons Owen papers, LI(K)).





The subsequent history of the debates surrounding Darwin’s
achievement forms a complex story that involves much of the history of
life science, as well as ethical theory, psychology, philosophy,
theology and social theory since 1870. For a general summary of recent
scholarship see Ruse 2013a and articles from this encyclopedia listed
below.


5. Summary and Conclusion



This article has intended to give a historical overview of the
specific nature of Darwinian theory, and outline the ways in which it
differed from the theories of predecessors in the nineteenth century
(see the entry
 
evolution before Darwin
).
 The eventual general consensus achieved by the middle of the
twentieth century around the so-named “Synthetic” theory
of evolution that would combine population genetics with a
mathematical analysis of evolutionary change, has formed a successful
research program for more than half a century (Smocovitis 1996; Mayr
and Provine 1980; Provine 1971). This “synthesis” has been
challenged in recent decades by the current movement known as
evolutionary developmental theory, or “evo-devo”. This
development represents in some important respects a return to
presumably discarded traditions and lines of exploration of the
nineteenth and early twentieth centuries which sought to link
evolution with embryological development, and to a complex
understanding of genetics, with re-examination of the effects of
external conditions on inheritance (Gilbert 2015; Newman 2015;
Laubichler and Maienschein 2007; Gissis and Jablonka 2011; Pigliucci
and Müller 2010; Amundson 2005; Gilbert, Opitz and Raff 1996).
Where these debates and revisions in evolutionary theory may lead in
another fifty years is a matter of speculation (Gayon 2015 in Sloan,
McKenny and Eggleson 2015).



More general philosophical issues associated with evolutionary
theory—those surrounding natural teleology, ethics, the relation
of evolutionary naturalism to the claims of religious traditions, the
implications for the relation of human beings to the rest of the
organic world—continue as issues of scholarly inquiry. The
status of Darwin’s accounts of human mental powers and moral
properties continue to be issues of philosophical debate. The adequacy
of his reliance on sexual selection to explain sex and gender roles in
human society form heated topics in some feminist scholarship. Such
developments suggest that there are still substantial theoretical
issues at stake that may alter the future understanding of
evolutionary theory in important ways (Sloan, McKenny, & Eggleson
[eds] 2015).






Bibliography




Amundson, Ron, 2005, 
The Changing Role of the Embryo in
Evolutionary Thought: Roots of Evo-Devo
, Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press. doi:10.1017/CBO9781139164856


Anon., “Review of the 
Descent of Man and Selection in
Relation to Sex”
, 
Edinburgh Review
 134 (July
1871), 195–235.


Artigas, Mariano, Thomas F. Glick, and Rafael A. Martínez,
2006, 
Negotiating Darwin: The Vatican Confronts Evolution,
1877–1902
, Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University
Press.


Barrett, Paul H., Peter J. Gautrey, Sandra Herbert, David Kohn,
and Sydney Smith (eds.), 1987, 
Charles Darwin’s Notebooks:
1836–1844
, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. [online
manuscripts at Darwin’s notebooks and reading lists.]


Beatty, John 1985, “Speaking of Species: Darwin’s
Strategy”, in Kohn 1985a: 265–281.
doi:10.1515/9781400854714.265


Bernard, Claude, 1865 [1957], 
Introduction to the Study of
Experimental Medicine
, translated Henry Copley Greene, New York:
Dover. Originally published in 1927, New York:Macmillan.
 [
Bernard 1865 available online
]


Boniolo, Giovanni and Gabriele De Anna (eds.) 2006,

Evolutionary Ethics an Contemporary Biology,
 Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.


Bowlby, John, 1990, 
Charles Darwin: A New Life
, New York:
Norton.


Bowler, Peter J., 1976, 
Fossils and Progress: Paleontology and
the Idea of Progressive Evolution in the Nineteenth Century
, New
York: Science History.


–––, 1983, 
The Eclipse of Darwinism:
Anti-Darwinian Evolution Theories in the Decades Around 1900
,
Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press.


–––, 1990, 
Charles Darwin: The Man and His
Influence
, Oxford: Blackwell.


–––, 1996, 
Life’s Splendid Drama:
Evolutionary Biology and the Reconstruction of Life’s Ancestry,
1860–1940
, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.


–––, 2013a, “Darwinism in Britain”,
in Ruse 2013a: 218–225. doi:10.1017/CBO9781139026895.028


Browne, Janet, 1995, 
Charles Darwin: Voyaging
, New York:
Knopf.


–––, 2002, 
Charles Darwin: The Power of
Place
, Princeton: Princeton University Press.


Burchfield, Joe D., 1975, 
Lord Kelvin and the Age of the
Earth
, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.


Burkhardt, Frederick et al., (eds.), 1985–2023, 
The
Correspondence of Charles Darwin
, 30 volumes. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.


Chambers, Robert, 1844 [1994], 
Vestiges of the Natural History
of Creation
, facsimile reprint of first edition, J. Secord (ed.),
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
 [
Chambers 1844 available online
]


Charmetant, Erin. 2013,“Darwin and Ethics”, in Ruse
2013a, 188–194.


Darwin, Charles Robert, 1836–1844 [1987], 
Charles
Darwin’s Notebooks: 1836–1844
, Paul H. Barrett, Peter
J. Gautrey, Sandra Herbert, David Kohn, and Sydney Smith (eds.),
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. See also the Darwin Online
section on
 
Darwin’s notebooks and reading lists
.


–––, 1856–1858 [1974], 
Charles
Darwin’s “Natural Selection”, Being the Second Part
of his Big Species Book Written from 1856 to 1858
, R.C. Stauffer
(ed.), 1974, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
 [
Natural Selection
 1974 available online
]


–––, 1842 [1996], “1842 Sketch On
Selection Under Domestication, Natural Selection, and Organic Beings
in the Wild State”, selection in Glick and Kohn 1996,
89–99.


–––, 1844a [1996], “1844 Essay: Variation
of Organic Beings in the Wild State”, in Glick and Kohn 1996,
99–115.


–––, 1859 [1964], 
On the Origin of Species
By Means of Natural Selection
, London: Murray. Facsimile reprint,
ed. E. Mayr Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press
 [
Origin
 first edition available online
]


–––, 1860, second edition
 [
Origin
 second edition available online
]


–––, 1861, third edition,
 [
Origin
 third edition available online
]


–––, 1862, first French edition, 
De
l’origine des espèces
, Clémence Royer
(trans.), Paris: Guillaumin.
 [
Origin
 French first edition available online
]


–––, 1866, fourth edition,
 [
Origin
 fourth edition available online
]


–––, 1869, fifth edition,
 [
Origin
 fifth edition available online
]


–––, 1872, sixth edition,
 [
Origin
 sixth edition available online


–––, 1868, 
The
Variation of Animals and Plants Under Domestication
, two volumes,
London: John Murray. First edition available online


–––, 1871 [1981], 
The
Descent of Man, and Selection in Relation
to Sex
, two volumes, London: John Murray. Reprinted, ed John T.
Bonner and Robert May, Princeton: Princeton University Press
 [
Descent
 1871 available online
]


–––, 1872, 
Expression of the Emotions in Man
and the Animals
, London: John Murray.
 [
Expression
 available online
]


Depew, David J., 2009, “The Rhetoric of the Origin of
Species”, in Ruse and Richards 2009: 237–255.
doi:10.1017/CCOL9780521870795.015


Depew, David J. and Bruce H. Weber, 1995, 
Darwinism Evolving:
Systems Dynamics and the Genealogy of Natural Selection
,
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.


Desmond, Adrian J., 1984, 
Archetypes and Ancestors:
Palaeontology in Victorian London, 1850–1875
, Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.


–––, and James R. Moore, 1991, 
Darwin
,
London: Michael Joseph.


–––, and James R. Moore, 2009,

Darwin’s Sacred Cause: How a Hatred of Slavery Shaped
Darwin’s Views on Human Evolution
, Boston: Houghton,
Mifflin, Harcourt.


Durant, John R., 1985, “The Ascent of Nature in
Darwin’s 
Descent of Man
”, in Kohn 1985a:
283–306. doi:10.1515/9781400854714.283


Ellegård, Alvar, 1990, 
Darwin and the General Reader;
the Reception of Darwin’s Theory of Evolution in the British
Periodical Press, 1859–1872
, reprint of 1958 edition,
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.


Elshakry, Marwa, 2013, 
Reading Darwin in Arabic,
1860–1950.
 Chicago: University of Chicago Press.


Engels, Eve-Marie and Thomas F. Glick (eds.), 2008, 
The
Reception of Charles Darwin in Europe
, London/New York:
Continuum.


Farber, Paul Lawrence, 1994, 
The Temptations of Evolutionary
Ethics
, Berkeley: University of California Press.


Finnegan, Diarmid A., 2013, “Darwin and
Protestantism”, in Ruse 2013a: 468–475.
doi:10.1017/CBO9781139026895.060


Gayon, Jean, 1998, 
Darwinism’s Struggle for Survival:
Heredity and the Hypothesis of Natural Selection
, Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.


–––, 2013, “Darwin and Darwinism in France
before 1900”, in Ruse 2013a: 243–249.
doi:10.1017/CBO9781139026895.031


–––, 2015, “What Future for
Darwinism?”, in Sloan, McKenny and Eggleson 2015:
404–423.


Gilbert, Scott F., 2015, “Evolution Through Developmental
Change”, in Sloan, McKenny, & Eggleson 2015:
35–60.


–––, John M. Opitz, and Rudolf A. Raff, 1996,
“Resynthesizing Evolutionary and Developmental Biology”,

Developmental Biology
, 173 (2): 357–372.
doi:10.1006/dbio.1996.0032


Gissis, Snait B. and Eva Jablonka (eds.), 2011,

Transformations of Lamarckism: From Subtle Fluids to Molecular
Biology
, (Vienna Series in Theoretical Biology), Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.


Gliboff, Sander, 2007, “H. G. Bronn and the History of
Nature”, 
Journal of the History of Biology
, 40 (2):
259–294. doi:10.1007/s10739-006-9114-4


–––, 2008, 
H. G. Bronn, Ernst Haeckel, and
the Origins of German Darwinism: A Study in Translation and
Transformation
, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.


Glick, Thomas F. (ed.), 1988, 
The Comparative Reception of
Darwinism
, New edition with new preface, Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.


–––, 2013, “Darwinism in Latin
America”, in Ruse 2013a: 258–263.
doi:10.1017/CBO9781139026895.033


–––, and Elinor S. Shaffer (eds.), 2014, 
The
Literary and Cultural Reception of Charles Darwin in Europe
,
London: Bloomsbury.


–––, and David Kohn (eds.), 1996, 
On
Evolution: The Development of the Theory of Natural Selection
,
Indianapolis, IN: Hackett.


Gray, Asa, 1860, “Review: The Origin of Species by Means of
Natural Selection”, 
American Journal of Science and
Arts
, series 2, 29: 153–184, written anonymously.
doi:10.2475/ajs.s2-29.86.153
 [
Gray 1860 available online
]


Haeckel, Ernst, 1868 [1876], 
Natürliche
Schöpfungsgeschichte
, Berlin: G. Reimer. Translated as

The History of Creation
, two volumes, London: Henry S.
King.


–––, 1874 [1879], 
Anthropogenie oder
Entwickelungsgeschichte des Menschen
, translated as 
The
Evolution of Man: A Popular Exposition of the Principal Points of
Human Ontogeny and Phylogeny.
 New York: Appleton.


–––, 1895–99 [1901], 
Die
Welträthsel
 (
Riddle of the Universe
). Translated by
Joseph McCabe, New York/London: Harper and Brothers.


Harvey, Joy, 2008, “Darwin in French Dress: Translating,
Publishing and Supporting Darwin in Nineteenth-Century France”,
in Engels and Glick 2008: 354–374.


Hauser, Marc D., 2006, 
Moral Minds: How Nature Designed Our
Universal Sense of Right and Wrong
, New York: Ecco.


Haught, John F., 2013, “Darwin and Catholicism”, in
Ruse 2013a: 485–492. doi:10.1017/CBO9781139026895.062


Herbert, Sandra, 2005, 
Charles Darwin, Geologist
, Ithaca,
NY: Cornell University Press.


Herschel, John F. W., 1830 [1987], 
A Preliminary Discourse on
the Study of Natural Philosophy
, reprint, Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.
 [
Herschel 1830 available online
]


Hodge, Jonathan [M.J.S.}, 1977, “The Structure and Strategy
of Darwin’s ‘Long Argument’”, 
British
Journal for the History of Science
, 10(3): 237.
doi:10.1017/S0007087400015685


–––,1983a, “Darwin and the Laws of the
Animate Part of the Terrestrial System (1835–1837): On the
Lyellian Origins of His Zoonomical Explanatory Program”,

Studies in the History of Biology
, 6: 1–106.


–––, 1983b, “The Development of
Darwin’s General Biological Theorizing”, in D. S. Bendall,

Evolution From Molecules to Men
, Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 43–62.


–––, 1985, “Darwin as a Lifelong
Generation Theorist”, in Kohn 1985a: 207–243.
doi:10.1515/9781400854714.207


–––, 2009, “The Notebook Programmes and
Projects of Darwin’s London Years”, in Hodge and Radick
2009: 44–72, doi:10.1017/CCOL9780521884754.003


–––, 2013a, “The Origins of the

Origin
”, in Ruse 2013a: 64–71.
doi:10.1017/CBO9781139026895.007


–––, 2013b, “Darwin’s Book: 
On
the Origin of Species
”, 
Science and Education
,
22(9): 2267–2294. doi:10.1007/s11191-012-9544-7


–––, and Gregory Radick (eds.), 2009, 
The
Cambridge Companion to Darwin
, Second edition, 2009,
doi:10.1017/CCOL9780521884754.


Hoquet, Thierry, 2013, “The Evolution of the Origin
(1859–1872)”, in Ruse 2013a: 158–164.
doi:10.1017/CBO9781139026895.020


Hösle, Vittorio and Christian Illies (eds.), 2005,

Darwinism and Philosophy
, Notre Dame, IN: University of Notre
Dame Press.


Hull, David L. (ed.), 1973, 
Darwin and His Critics: The
Reception of Darwin’s Theory of Evolution by the Scientific
Community
, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.


–––, 2009, “Darwin’s Science and
Victorian Philosophy of Science”, in Hodge and Gregory Radick
2009: 173–196, doi:10.1017/CCOL9780521884754.008


–––, Peter D. Tessner, and Arthur M. Diamond,
1978, “Planck’s Principle”, 
Science
,
202(4369): 717–723. doi:10.1126/science.202.4369.717


Huxley, Thomas Henry, 1863, 
Evidence as to Man’s Place
in Nature
, London: Williams and Norgate.
 [
Huxley 1863 available online
]


–––, 1893, “Evolution and Ethics”,
London: Macmillan. Romanes lecture.


–––, 1895, 
Evolution and Ethics and Other
Essays
, London: Macmillan. Includes a “Prolegomena”.
Parts translated into Chinese by Yan Fu as 天演論
(
Tianyan lun
), 1898.
 [
Huxley 1895 available online
]
 [
Yan Fu translation of Huxley 1895 available online
]


Jenkin, H. Fleeming, 1867 [1973], “[Review] The Origin of
Species”, 
The North British Review
, 46 (June):
277–318. Reprinted in Hull 1973: 303–350.
 [
Jenkin 1867 available online
]


Jin, Xiaoxing, 2019a, “Darwin in China,
1870–1935”, Unpublished Ph.D. Thesis, University of Notre
Dame.


–––, 2019b, “Translation and
Transmutation: The Origin of Species in China”, 
The British
Journal for the History of Science
, 52(1): 117–141.
doi:10.1017/S0007087418000808.


–––, 2020, “The Evolution of Evolutionism
in China, 1870–1930”, 
Isis
 111(1): 46–66. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1086/708367.


–––, 2022, “The Evolution of Social
Darwinism in China, 1895–1930”, 
Comparative Studies in
Society and History
 64(3): 690–721. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0010417522000214.


Johnson, Paul, 2012, 
Darwin: Portrait of a Genius
, New
York: Viking.


Katz, Leonard D. (ed.), 2000, 
Evolutionary Origins of
Morality: Cross-Disciplinary Perspectives
, Exeter, UK: Imprint
Academic.


Kelly, Alfred, 1981, 
The Descent of Darwin: The Popularization
of Darwinism in Germany, 1860–1914
, Chapel Hill, NC:
University of North Carolina Press.


Keynes, Richard (ed.), 2000, 
Charles Darwin’s Zoology
Notes & Specimen Lists from H.M.S. Beagle
, Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
 [
Keynes 2000 available online
]


Kohn, David (ed.), 1985a, 
The Darwinian Heritage
,
Princeton: Princeton University Press. doi:10.1515/9781400854714


–––, 1985b, “Darwin’s Principle of
Divergence as Internal Dialogue”, in Kohn 1985a: 245–257.
doi:10.1515/9781400854714.245


–––, 2009, “Darwin’s Keystone: The
Principle of Divergence”, in Ruse and Richards 2009:
87–108, doi:10.1017/CCOL9780521870795.008.


Laubichler, Manfred Dietrich and Jane Maienschein (eds.), 2007,

From Embryology to Evo-Devo: A History of Developmental
Evolution
, (Dibner Institute Studies in the History of Science
and Technology), Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.


–––, 2013, “Developmental
Evolution”, in Ruse 2013a: 375–382.
doi:10.1017/CBO9781139026895.048


Largent, Mark, 2013, “Darwinism in the United States,
1859–1930”, in Ruse 2013a: 226–234.


–––, 2009. “The So-Called Eclipse of
Darwinism”, 
Transactions of the American Philosophical
Society
, 99(4): 3–21.


Lennox, James G., 1993, “Darwin Was a Teleologist”,

Biology & Philosophy
, 8(4): 409–421.
doi:10.1007/BF00857687


–––, 2005, “Darwin’s Methodological
Evolution”, 
Journal of the History of Biology
, 38(1):
85–99. doi:10.1007/s10739-004-6511-4


–––, 2013, “Darwin and Teleology”,
in Ruse 2013a: 152–157. doi:10.1017/CBO9781139026895.019


Lightman, Bernard (ed.), 2015, 
Global Spencerism: The
Communication and Appropriation of a British Evolutionist
,
Leiden: Brill. doi:10.1163/9789004264007


Lyell, Charles, 1830–33 [1990], 
Principles of Geology
, 3
vols. London: Murray, facsimile reprint, ed. Martin J. Rudwick,
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.


–––, 1863, 
The Geological Evidences of the
Antiquity of Man
, London: John Murray.
 [
Lyell 1863 available online
]


MacPherson, Ryan, 2015, 
Debating Evolution Before Darwinism:
An Exploration of Science and Religion in America,
1844–1859
, Mantako, MN: Into Your Hands Press.


Maienschein, Jane and Michael Ruse (eds.), 1999, 
Biology and
the Foundation of Ethics
, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
doi:10.1017/CBO9780511609077


Mallet, James, 2013, “Darwin and Species”, in Ruse
2013a: 109–115. doi:10.1017/CBO9781139026895.013


Malthus, Thomas, 1826, 
An Essay on the Principle of
Population
, 6th edition. London.[available online]


Mayr, Ernst and William B. Provine (eds.), 1980, 
The
Evolutionary Synthesis: Perspectives on the Unification of
Biology
, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.


Mivart, St. George Jackson, 1871, 
On the Genesis of
Species
, London: MacMillan [available online]


Moore, George Edward, 1903, 
Principia Ethica
, Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
 [
G.E. Moore 1903 available online
]


Moore, James R., 1979, 
The Post-Darwinian Controversies: A
Study of the Protestant Struggle to Come to Terms with Darwin in Great
Britain and America 1870–1900
, Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press. doi:10.1017/CBO9780511622830


Mullen, Pierce C., 1964, “The Preconditions and Reception of
Darwinian Biology in Germany, 1800–1870”, Unpublished Ph.D
Dissertation, University of California, Berkeley.


Newman, Stuart A., 2015, “The Evolution of Evolutionary
Mechanisms”, in Sloan, McKenny, and Eggleson 2015:
61–89.


Norman, David, 2013, “Charles Darwin’s Geology”,
in Ruse 2013a: 46–55. doi:10.1017/CBO9781139026895.005


Numbers, Ronald L., 1998, 
Darwinism Comes to America
,
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.


Olby, Robert C., 1963, “Charles Darwin’s Manuscript of
Pangenesis”, 
The British Journal for the History of
Science
, 1(3): 251–263. doi:10.1017/S0007087400001497


–––, 2013, “Darwin and Heredity”, in
Ruse 2013a: 116–123. doi:10.1017/CBO9781139026895.014


Ospovat, Dov, 1981, 
The Development of Darwin’s Theory:
Natural History, Natural Theology, and Natural Selection
,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.


Pancaldi, Giuliano, 1983 [1991], 
Darwin in Italia: Impresa
scientifica e frontiere culturali
, (Saggi 248), Bologna: il
Mulino. Translated as 
Darwin in Italy: Science across Cultural
Frontiers
, Ruey Brodine Morelli (trans.), Bloomington: Indiana
University Press, 1991.


Peckham, Morse (ed.), 2006, 
The Origin of Species: a Variorum
Text
, Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, reprint of
1959 edition.


Pigliucci, Massimo and Gerd Müller (eds.), 2010,

Evolution, the Extended Synthesis
, Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.


Prestes, Maria Elice Brzezinski (ed.), 2023, 
Understanding
Evolution in Darwin
’s ‘Origin’: 
The
Emerging Context of Evolutionary Thinking
, Cham: Springer.


Provine, William B., 1971, 
The Origins of Theoretical
Population Genetics
, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.


Pusey, James Reeve, 1983, 
China and Charles Darwin
,
(Harvard East Asian Monographs 100), Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press.


Radick, Gregory, 2013, “Darwin and Humans”, in Ruse
2013a: 173–181. doi:10.1017/CBO9781139026895.022


Richards, Evelleen, 2017, 
Darwin and the Making of Sexual
Selection
, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
doi:10.7208/chicago/9780226437064.001.0001


Richards, Richard A., 2010, 
The Species Problem: A
Philosophical Analysis
, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
doi:10.1017/CBO9780511762222


–––, 2013, “Sexual Selection”, in
Ruse 2013a: 103–108. doi:10.1017/CBO9781139026895.012


Richards, Robert J., 1987, 
Darwin and the Emergence of
Evolutionary Theories of Mind and Behavior
, Chicago: University
of Chicago Press.


–––, 1999, “Darwin’s Romantic
Biology: The Foundation of His Evolutionary Ethics”, in J.
Maienschein and M. Ruse 1999 (eds.) 1999: 113–153.
doi:10.1017/CBO9780511609077.007


–––, 2002, 
The Romantic Conception of Life:
Science and Philosophy in the Age of Goethe
, Chicago: University
of Chicago Press.


–––, 2005, “Darwin’s Metaphysics of
Mind”, in Hösle and Illies 2005, 166–180.


–––, 2008, 
The Tragic Sense of Life: Ernst
Haeckel and the Struggle Over Evolutionary Thought
, Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.


–––, 2009, “Darwin on Mind, Morals and
Emotions”, in Hodge and Radick 2009: 96–119,
doi:10.1017/CCOL9780521884754.005


–––, 2013, “The German Reception of
Darwin’s Theory, 1860–1945”, in Ruse 2013a:
235–242. doi:10.1017/CBO9781139026895.030


–––, 2015, “Darwin’s Evolutionary
Ethics: the Empirical and Normative Justifications”, in Sloan,
McKenny and Eggleson, 2015, 182–200.


–––, and Michael Ruse, 2016, 
Debating
Darwin
, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.


Ruse, Michael, 1975, “Darwin’s Debt to Philosophy: An
Examination of the Influence of the Philosophical Ideas of John F. W.
Herschel and William Whewell on the Development of Charles
Darwin’s Theory of Evolution”, 
Studies in the History
and Philosophy of Science
, 6: 159–181.


–––, 2009a, “The Origin of the

Origin
”, in Ruse and R. J. Richards 2009: 14–14.
doi:10.1017/CCOL9780521870795.003


–––, 2009b, 
Defining Darwin: Essays on the
History and Philosophy of Evolutionary Biology
, Amherst, MA:
Prometheus Books.


–––, 2009c, 
Philosophy After Darwin: Classic
and Contemporary Readings
, Princeton: Princeton University
Press.


––– (ed.), 2013a, 
The Cambridge Encyclopedia
of Darwin and Evolutionary Thought
, Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press. doi:10.1017/CBO9781139026895


–––, 2013b, “Evolution before
Darwin”, in Ruse 2013a: 39–45.
doi:10.1017/CBO9781139026895.004


–––, 2013c, “The 
Origin of
Species
”, in Ruse 2013a: 95–102.
doi:10.1017/CBO9781139026895.011


–––, and Robert J. Richards (eds.), 2009,

The Cambridge Companion to the “Origin of
Species”
, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
doi:10.1017/CCOL9780521870795


Secord, James A., 2000, 
Victorian Sensation: The Extraordinary
Publication, Reception, and Secret Authorship of Vestiges of the
Natural History of Creation
, Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.


Shen, Vincent, 2016, “Translation and Interpretation: the
Case of Introducing Darwinian Evolutionism into China”,

Universitas: Monthly Review of Philosophy and Culture
 , 43:
3–25.


Sloan, Phillip R. 1986, “Darwin, Vital Matter, and the
Transformism of Species”, 
Journal of the History of
Biology
, 19 (3): 369–445. doi:10.1007/BF00138286


–––, 1999, “From Natural Law to
Evolutionary Ethics in Enlightenment French Natural History”, in
Maienschein and Ruse 1999: 52–83.
doi:10.1017/CBO9780511609077.004


–––, 2009a, “The Making of a Philosophical
Naturalist”, in Hodge and Radick 2009: 21–43,
doi:10.1017/CCOL9780521884754.002


–––, 2009b, “Originating Species: Darwin
on the Species Problem”, in Ruse and R. J. Richards 2009:
67–86. doi:10.1017/CCOL9780521870795.007


–––, Gerald P McKenny, and Kathleen Eggleson
(eds.), 2015, 
Darwin in the Twenty-First Century: Nature,
Humanity, and God
, Notre Dame, IN: University of Notre Dame
Press.


Smocovitis, Vassiliki Betty, 1996, 
Unifying Biology: The
Evolutionary Synthesis and Evolutionary Biology
, Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press.


Sober, Elliott, 1984, 
The Nature of Selection: Evolutionary
Theory in Philosophical Focus
, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.


Spencer, Herbert, 1864, 
Principles of Biology
, London:
Williams and Noegate.
 [
Spencer 1864 available online
]


Stamos, David N., 2003, 
The Species Problem: Biological
Species, Ontology, and the Metaphysics of Biology
, Lanham, MA:
Lexington Books.


–––, 2007, 
Darwin and the Nature of
Species
, Albany, NY: State University of New York Press.


Swetlitz, Marc, 2013, “Judaism, Jews, and Evolution”,
in Ruse 2013a: 493–498. doi:10.1017/CBO9781139026895.063


Theunissen, Bert, 2013, “The Analogy between Artificial and
Natural Selection”, in Ruse 2013a: 88–94.
doi:10.1017/CBO9781139026895.010


Todes, Daniel Philip, 1989, 
Darwin Without Malthus: the
Struggle for Existence in Russian Evolutionary Thought
, New York
and Oxford: Oxford University Press.


Vorzimmer, Peter J., 1970, 
Charles Darwin, The Years of
Controversy: The Origin of Species and Its Critics,
1859–1882
, Philadelphia: Temple University Press.


Wallace, Alfred R., 1858, “On the Tendency of Varieties to
Depart Indefinitely from the Original Type”, in Glick and Kohn
1996, 335–345.


–––,“The Origin of Human Races and the
Antiquity of Man Deduced from the Theory of ‘Natural
Selection’”, 
Journal of the Anthropological Society of
London
, 2: clviii–clxxxvii. doi:10.2307/3025211


Waters, C. Kenneth, 2009, “The Arguments in the 
Origin
of Species
”, in Hodge and Radick 2009: 120–144,
doi:10.1017/CCOL9780521884754.006


Whewell, William, 1837, 
History of the Inductive Sciences,
from the Earliest to the Present Times
, three volumes, London:
Parker.


–––, 1840, 
The Philosophy of the Inductive
Sciences
, London: Parker.
 [
Whewell 1840 available online
]


–––, 1858, 
Novum Organon Renovatum, Being
the Second Part of the Philosophy of the Inductive Sciences
,
thirrd edition, London: Parker.
 [
Whewell 1858 available online
]


White, Roger M., M. J. S. Hodge, and Gregory Radick, 2021,

Darwin’s Argument by Analogy: From Artificial to Natural
Selection
, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.


Wilkins, John S., 2009, 
Species: a History of the Idea
,
Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press.


Yang Haiyan, 2013, “Encountering Darwin and Creating
Darwinism in China”, in Ruse 2013a: 250–257.
doi:10.1017/CBO9781139026895.032


Yan Fu, 1898, 
Tianyan lun
, translation of Huxley 1895,

[available online
]


Young, Robert M., 1985, 
Darwin’s Metaphor:
Nature’s Place in Victorian Culture
, Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.








Academic Tools










How to cite this entry
.








Preview the PDF version of this entry
 at the
 
Friends of the SEP Society
.








Look up topics and thinkers related to this entry

 at the Internet Philosophy Ontology Project (InPhO).








Enhanced bibliography for this entry

at 
PhilPapers
, with links to its database.












Other Internet Resources




The Complete Works of Charles Darwin Online
,
 maintained by John van Wyhe, Cambridge University Library. In
particular note the
 
Darwin Papers & Manuscripts

 section


Darwin Manuscripts Project
,
 maintained by David Kohn in cooperation with the American Museum of
Natural History Research Library.


Darwin Correspondence Project
,
 University of Cambridge.




Letter to Charles Lyell, 28 September 1860, DCP-LETT-2931


Letter from J.D. Hooker, 8 February 1867, DCP-LETT-5395


Letter to William Turner, 11 February 1867, DCP-LETT-5398


Letter to Asa Gray, 15 March 1870, DCP-LETT-7132


 


Ghiselin, Michael T., 2009,
 
Darwin: A Reader’s Guide

 [PDF], Occasional Papers of the California Academy of Sciences
155.


The Huxley File
,
 maintained by Charles Blinderman and David Joyce (Clark
University).


Works by Ernst Heinrich Haeckel
,
 Project Gutenberg.


Wallace Online
,
 maintained by John van Wyhe, Cambridge University Library.








Related Entries




adaptationism
 |
 
altruism
 |
 
altruism: biological
 |
 
animal: cognition
 |
 
animal: consciousness
 |
 
biology: philosophy of
 |
 
comparative cognition, methods in
 |
 
creationism
 |
 
Darwinism
 |
 
evolution: concept before Darwin
 |
 
evolution: cultural
 |
 
fitness
 |
 
genetics: ecological
 |
 
life
 |
 
morality: and evolutionary biology
 |
 
moral sentimentalism
 |
 
natural selection
 |
 
natural selection: units and levels of
 |
 
Newton, Isaac: philosophy
 |
 
species
 |
 
Spencer, Herbert
 |
 
teleology: teleological notions in biology
 |
 
Whewell, William








Acknowledgments



The author wishes to acknowledge the valuable comments on this version
of the article by David Depew, Gregory Radick, M. J. S. Hodge, Alan
Love, and Xiaoxing Jin. Additional comments were made on an earlier
version by Michael Ruse, Robert J. Richards, Edward Zalta, M.
Katherine Tillman, and the anonymous reviewers for the Stanford
Encyclopedia of Philosophy. I am particularly indebted to Dr. Xiaoxing
Jin for information contained in his substantial doctoral work and
subsequent research on the reception of Darwinism into China.
Responsibility for all interpretations is my own.








 






Copyright © 2024
 by




Phillip Sloan

<
sloan
.
1
@
nd
.
edu
>
    




 









  Open access to the SEP is made possible by a world-wide funding initiative.

  Please Read How You Can Help Support the Growth and Development of the Encyclopedia




 

