











 
 Entry Navigation 






Entry Contents


Bibliography


Academic Tools


Friends PDF Preview 


Author and Citation Info 
 


Back to Top 


























Philosophy of Science in Latin America
First published Wed Dec 2, 2015; substantive revision Fri Mar 8, 2024





When philosophy of science began as a professional field in the late
1940s, contributions from Latin America joined the forefront of the
international debate right away. Philosophers of science from the
subcontinent have expanded their presence ever since. This article
aims to provide an overview of philosophy of science in the
subcontinent. The primary focus is on contributions produced in Latin
America by thinkers living in the region, with an emphasis on
“mainstream philosophy of science”—a discipline
centered on the study of scientific knowledge, metaphysics,
methodology, and values, broadly analytic in style, as exemplified by
works published in high-quality journals such as 
Philosophy of
Science
, 
Erkenntnis
, 
The British Journal for the
Philosophy of Science
, and 
Studies in the History and
Philosophy of Science
.



This entry has four parts. Section 1 provides historical background.
Section 2 is devoted to philosophy of science activity in various
regional centers through the early 1990s when the Internet and
improved institutional resources “globalized” the practice
of philosophy of science, greatly blurring earlier geographical
separations. The two following sections focus on the last decades:
Section 3 presents contributions to the general philosophy of science,
and Section 4 reviews advances in the philosophy of particular
sciences. The final Section 5 briefly considers some of the
difficulties and prospects for philosophy of science in Latin
America.



In this article effort is made to provide an even-handed and objective
picture, but of course only a selective sketch is possible, made of
choices influenced by the authors’ interpretation of the
field.








1. Historical Background


2. The Early Decades




2.1 Mexico


2.2 Brazil


2.3 Andean Countries


2.4 Argentina and Uruguay






3. General Philosophy of Science




3.1 Scientific Method


3.2 Rationality and Theory Choice


3.3 Dynamics of Science


3.4 Scientific Realism


3.5 Pluralisms in Science


3.6 Representation in Science


3.7 Causation and Laws of Nature


3.8 Philosophical History of Science


3.9 Science, Society, and Values






4. Philosophy of Particular Sciences




4.1 Philosophy of Physics


4.2 Philosophy of Chemistry


4.3 Philosophy of Biology


4.4 Philosophy of Formal Sciences


4.5 Philosophy of Cognitive Sciences


4.6 Philosophy of Social Sciences


4.7 Philosophy of Technology


4.8 Other Topics






5. Concluding Remarks


Bibliography


Academic Tools


Other Internet Resources


Related Entries










1. Historical Background



It is useful to begin with a brief historical background. Science and
scientific thought have long functioned in Latin America as beacons of
civic hope and progress amidst multiple recurrent frustrations that
vary in kind and texture from place to place. In most of the region,
the Enlightenment ideals that fueled independence movements of the
early nineteenth century were quickly disappointed by the chaos and
general barbarism that followed in much of the region until the 1860s.
It was different in Brazil, where emancipation from Europe occurred
gradually and orderly during the century, but there too problems grew
as did also tensions between the economic elite and the
country’s leading liberal thinkers.



Reacting against expanding frustration, many Latin Americans saw a
solution in the “scientific” ways of thinking dominant in
the industrialized countries. In the 1850s a progressive philosophy
was in full flight in the larger world, ready-made for Latin American
visionaries: French Positivism, a doctrine of progress and secular
religion, centered on hope in modern science, led by Auguste Comte.
Committed to fighting the temptations of barbarism, the positivists
sought to continue the project of the Enlightenment. Against the
impulsive approach to decision-making then prevailing in most of Latin
America, local positivists sought to extend scientific thought to
philosophy and political action, convinced it would promote
objectivity, rational consensus, publicly accessible cumulative truth
in all spheres, along the material success characteristic of modern
science. Between about 1870 and 1910 positivism took strong hold in
much of Latin America, with an agenda that called for methodological
improvement in the local practice of the natural sciences, medicine,
and education, also greatly influencing activity in philosophy,
history, art, and law (see, e.g., Frondizi 1943; Zea 1943–44;
Nachman 1977; Quintanilla 2006). In Argentina, scientism and
Comte’s philosophy had influential defenders, notably Domingo
Faustino Sarmiento, many scientists (e.g., paleontologist Florentino
Ameghino), physician-philosophers (e.g., José Ingenieros and
Alejandro Korn), educators (e.g., Pedro Scalabrini), and lawyers
(e.g., Carlos Octavio Bunge, whose nephew Mario A. Bunge would become
an international figure in philosophy of science in the following
century). A conviction these thinkers shared stated that a modern and
efficient system of public education was indispensable for achieving
the desired transformations. Interest in advancing the positivist
approach grew to religious heights especially in Brazil, where it was
championed by distinguished political figures, notably Miguel de
Lemos, a reorganizer of the country’s curriculum and a decisive
force in the construction of the first Humanity Temple for the
propagation of Comte’s ideas in the world. When Brazil became a
republic in 1889, positivist doctrine made its way to the new flag,
the motto “Order and Progress” lifted from Comte’s
writings—in 
Système de Politique Positive

(1851), the preliminary discourse’s conclusion begins with the
words “Love for principle, order for base, and progress for
aim” (
L’amour pour principe, l’ordre pour base,
et le progrès pour but
; p. 321).



The influence of positivism in Mexico was nearly as strong,
particularly in education, as exemplified by the labors of the
respected chemist and medical doctor Gabino Barreda, who banned
religion and traditional philosophy from the school curriculum and
centralized access to higher education and culture. In Chile, the
brothers Jorge and Enrique Lagarrigue were two leading advocates of
Comte’s philosophy and his Humanity Religion. In Colombia,
Rafael Nuñez, an educational reformer and three times president
of Colombia, actively promoted positivism, as did in Peru (with
touches of Herbert Spencer’s evolutionism) such figures as
Javier Prado, Manuel González Prada, Celso Bambarén, and
Manuel Vicente Villarán. In Bolivia, positivism also had
influential defenders from the 1870s through the 1890s, notably a
circle of writers, “
Círculo Literario
”, in
whose journal works by Charles Darwin, Luis Dumont, Ernst H. P. A.
Haeckel and other naturalists appeared in translation.



With all this intellectual and progressive enthusiasm in the air,
hopes of imminent general improvement ran high, but
“positive” results were slow in coming. The expectations
of economic advancement and civic improvement did not materialize as
advertised. To compound matters, the devastation caused by the Great
War in Europe badly compromised social faith in the products of
science. Positivism waned accordingly in Latin America, replaced in
the 1920s by a more radical social thought, especially Marxism, as
well as approaches distrustful of naturalist reasoning (Bergsonian
spiritualism, phenomenology, and later existentialism). Metaphysics
unbridled by standard logic became dominant in many university
circles.



Reactions to excessively “high philosophy” began to arise
in the 1940s, helped by the arrival of thinkers from Europe, for
example Juan David García Bacca in the cases of Ecuador,
Mexico, and Venezuela, Hans Lindemann in Argentina, and Gilles-Gaston
Granger in Brazil. Along the way came a revival of interest in logic,
science-friendly epistemology, and the study of conceptual structures.
Thanks to these developments, when philosophy of science became a
professional field in the late 1940s, Latin America had some
scientists and philosophers ready and willing to fully join their
counterparts in Europe and North America. Since then, for the past
seventy years, a number of philosophers of science based in Latin
America, often in uncooperative environments, have managed to produce
work of the highest international standards (something not so clearly
apparent in the developing world in other branches of international
philosophy).



By the mid 1990s, academic centers in Latin America began to benefit
from the kind of world-wide interaction made possible by the Internet,
electronic libraries, and improved forms of institutional support for
integration and travel. With geographical and institutional barriers
greatly reduced, the field expanded considerably. Over the last three
decades virtually every theme in philosophy of science would develop a
presence in works produced in Latin America. Dialogue and
collaboration between researchers now transcend the traditional local
boundaries. This new global environment makes less relevant the
traditional geographical approach to philosophical production in the
region. Accordingly, Sections 3 and 4, devoted to activity from the
mid 1990s on, structure the subject around themes, concepts, and
principles (rather than around geography and individuals).


2. The Early Decades


2.1 Mexico



Philosophy of science developed a robust presence at Universidad
Nacional Autónoma de México (UNAM), a major institution
at the forefront of intellectual life in the country and the
Spanish-speaking world. The discipline began to be cultivated in the
1950s at UNAM’s School of Philosophy and Literature
(
Facultad de Filosofía y Letras,
 FFyL), with faculty
members such as Eli de Gortari, founder (in 1955) of the Seminar on
Scientific and Philosophical Problems – active to the present
day – in which distinguished scientists and philosophers have
participated through its different stages. Also important was the
teaching work of Wonfilio Trejo in the epistemology of empirical
science and of Hugo Padilla, a pioneer in Mexico of the philosophy of
technology and translator into Spanish of central texts by G.
Frege.



The discipline gained strength in the 1960s and early 1970s through
the efforts of prominent faculty members, especially Fernando
Salmerón, Luis Villoro, and Alejandro Rossi, who encouraged
rigor and clarity in philosophy and provided scholarship support to
enable students to do post-graduate work in Europe, the United
Kingdom, and the United States. Together, they founded the journal

Crítica
 in 1967, a choice venue for philosophy in
Latin America and Spain. An influential work by Salmerón,

La Filosofía y las Matemáticas
, came out the
following year. Major international seminars and meetings became a
regular feature at UNAM’s Institute for Philosophical
Investigations (
Instituto de Investigaciones
Filosóficas
—IIF). One of the first international
seminars focused on the philosophy and history of science, which took
place in 1976, was organized by Mario Bunge (Argentina and Canada),
who carried out a productive two-year research stay at the IIF.



In the 1970s, two researchers, who were fundamental in the development
of the discipline, joined the IIF: Ulises Moulines (born in
Venezuela), who moved to IIF from Munich, and Mario Otero (Uruguay),
exiled for political reasons, specialist in the history and philosophy
of mathematics, as well as in the analysis of research policies in
science and technology. During his tenure in Mexico, from 1976 to
1983, Moulines published 
Exploraciones metacientíficas

(1982), which was the main vehicle for introducing to Latin America
the structuralist conception of scientific theories (developed by J.D.
Sneed, W. Stegmüller, and Moulines himself). He devoted much of
his research during the 1970s and 1980s to the dynamics of theories,
applying, in an original synthesis, the formal resources of diachronic
structuralist reconstruction and Kuhnian analysis of theory change,
which is reflected in his model for the evolutionary reconstruction of
scientific theories. Another of Moulines’s major contributions
has been his defense of a broad-spectrum pluralism (ontological,
semantic, epistemological, and methodological).



Research seminars at IIF continued to develop and strengthen in the
1980s with a series of annual international symposia of philosophy.
This period was also marked by institutional investment in specialized
research libraries and the reinforcement of publishing programs at
UNAM and other institutions in Mexico. Significant papers and
monographs began to flow regularly from seminars on general philosophy
of science, philosophy of physics, and philosophy of biology. From the
mid-1980s to the present day, the IIF has continuously hosted seminars
and short courses taught by distinguished philosophers of science: Bas
van Fraassen, Dudley Shapere, Wesley Salmon, Hilary Putnam, Ricardo
Gómez, Zeljko Loparic, Marcelo Dascal, Miguel Ángel
Quintanilla, Dorothy Edgington, Javier Echeverría, Larry
Laudan, Samir Okasha, Eduardo Flichman, William Wimsatt, Elliot Sober,
Oscar Nudler, Fernando Broncano, Ilkka Niiniluoto, Paul Thagard, Ian
Hacking, Helen Longino, among many others.



It is important to emphasize that the consolidation and
professionalization of the philosophy of science in Mexico was
achieved mainly through the creation of specialized degree programs.
The first was at the Metropolitan Autonomous University (UAM), and the
second was at UNAM. Fernando Salmerón and Luis Villoro, aware
of the need to train academics specialized in logic and philosophy of
science, created the first 
Maestría en Filosofía de
la Ciencia
 in the country, at the UAM (Iztapalapa campus). At
that juncture, León Olivé returned to Mexico
– having obtained a Ph.D. at the University of Oxford – and
started this degree program in 1980, with the support of IIF
researchers, such as Ulises Moulines, Mario Otero, Elia Nathan
(history of science), Raúl Orayen (philosophy of logic), plus
other faculty members such as Villoro himself (theory of knowledge),
Susana Berestovoy and Ignacio Jané (logic and model theory). In
this master’ degree, the first two generations of philosophers
of science were trained, whose graduates joined the faculty of the UAM
itself, the UNAM, and other national universities. Among other
graduates are José Alfredo Amor, Leobardo Plata, Fernanda
Clavel, Ana Rosa Pérez Ransanz, Ambrosio Velasco Gómez,
Raúl Alcalá, Mario Casanueva, Carlos López
Beltrán, José de Teresa and Armando Cíntora.
Despite the success of this specialized degree program, due to
institutional policy issues, the UAM-Iztapalapa modified its
philosophy curricula, and unfortunately a good part of the academics
who supported this master’s degree – between 1980 and
1984 – abandoned the program.



In the mid-1980s, Salmerón and Villoro, together with
Olivé – who in 1985 was appointed director of the
IIF – promoted a new scholarship program abroad in central areas
of philosophy. In this context, Ambrosio Velasco (Minnesota), Atocha
Aliseda (Stanford), Carlos López Beltrán (London), and
Raymundo Morado (Indiana) obtained their Ph.D. In parallel, the IIF
provided strong support to the UNAM’s 
Doctorado en
Filosofía
 to have high-level visiting professors such as
those mentioned above (van Fraassen, Shapere, Quintanilla, Laudan,
Echeverría). Furthermore, in those years, Adolfo García
de la Sienra, with a dissertation in philosophy of economics (Stanford
University), and Sergio Martínez, in philosophy of physics
(Indiana University), joined the IIF.



Thanks to this academic policy, it was possible to gather the
necessary critical mass to create at UNAM, under the guidance of
Olivé, the 
Programa de Maestría y Doctorado en
Filosofía de la Ciencia
, which started in 1993 under the
successful coordination of Ambrosio Velasco. This is the program where
most of the new generations now working in the discipline in Mexico
have been trained.


2.2 Brazil



An influential textbook by Gilles-Gaston Granger, 
Lógica e
Filosofia das Ciências
 —first published in
1955—is acknowledged as the first introduction to the field in
Portuguese. A disciple of Gaston Bachelard, Granger taught at the
University of São Paulo (USP) from 1947 to 1953 and was a major
force in the development of philosophy of science in Brazil. His work
favored a historically-oriented approach hospitable to the Anglo-Saxon
analytic style. Back in Europe he associated himself with various
philosophical and social projects; in 1986 he was elected to the Chair
of Comparative Epistemology at the 
Collège de France
.
The research projects Granger started in Brazil continued after his
tenure, especially thanks to the efforts of Oswaldo Porchat.



In 1964 a military coup led to government action eradicating academics
suspected of leftist sympathies, seriously disrupting many fields,
including philosophy of science. Nevertheless, faculty groups were
soon able to restore activity. In 1970, at USP João Paulo
Monteiro managed to start 
Ciência e Filosofia
, a
journal dedicated to logic and philosophy of science from a plurality
of perspectives. Revitalization of the discipline continued throughout
the decade with timely research projects, often carried out in
conjunction with international visits and courses, notably ones
organized by Porchat, first at USP and after 1975 at State University
of Campinas (UNICAMP), where he headed a new unit, 
Centro de
Lógica, Epistemologia e História da Ciência

(CLE), whose members included Zeljko Loparic and other distinguished
scholars. In 1977 CLE launched the prestigious journal

Manuscrito
, supplemented in 1980 by 
Cadernos de Filosofia
e História da Ciência
, and in 1987 by a book series
(
Coleção CLE
). CLE quickly became a symbol of
hope for philosophers and historians of science as well as logicians.
In particular, CLE is involved in the articulation of
“Paraconsistent Logic”, a field Newton C. da Costa began
to develop in the late 1950s and early 1960s when he was working at
Federal University of Paraná. Da Costa is one of the most
charismatic and energetic thinkers in Latin America, a world-class
figure in mathematics, logic, and philosophy of science, with a widely
recognized reputation for original works on non-classical logics, the
axiomatization of scientific theories, and structuralist philosophy of
science, orientations that continue to be active in Brazil with such
figures as Itala D’Ottaviano and Walter Carnielli.



In philosophy of science CLE supports significant research on the
character and structure of modern science as well as its concepts and
theories—conducted from a variety of perspectives, including
investigations in science teaching and the uses of philosophy of
science in education. Critical dialogue has been fostered through
seminars, distinguished international visits, research funding,
faculty and student exchanges, interdisciplinary studies, and the
publication of monographs and papers by Brazilian authors as well as
translations of major works into Portuguese. Post-graduate studies and
postdoctoral fellowships in logic and philosophy of science are
thriving accordingly at UNICAMP. One scheme developed by CLE to
attract promising faculty recently graduated from institutions
worldwide produced excellent results. In the 1980s Michel Ghins and
Harvey Brown energized analytic activity on space-time physics. Steven
French did likewise in advancing the model-theoretic approach and the
metaphysics of quantum mechanics at Campinas. With the help of these
and other recruits, philosophy of physics, mathematics, and formal
approaches to the philosophy of science thrived. At Campinas, French
and da Costa started a long-lasting collaboration that proved
remarkably fertile, resulting in influential contributions to current
debates on the metaphysics of quantum mechanics, structuralism, and
the semantic approach to theories, as well as a fresher way of looking
at the concept of truth (“pragmatic truth” and
“partial truth”). These collaborations led to many papers
(Da Costa and French 1989, 1990, 1991, 1993) as well as a book in
2003, 
Science and Partial Truth: A Unitary Approach to Models and
Scientific Reasoning
, which received international acclaim for
the light it casts on philosophical logic, structuralism, and realism.
Brown and French made Brazil their country, and it is easy to imagine
how different the geography of philosophy of physics and mathematics
might have turned out had circumstances in Brazil been a little kinder
to academic life in the 1980s. Together with da Costa, the
international recruits and the local talents they began to nurture
would have probably turned CLE and USP (where Otávio Bueno had
worked with da Costa) into top centers for philosophy of science in
the world. Destiny dictated otherwise, however; Ghins left to a
professorship at Louvain-la-Neuve, Belgium; Brown moved to a
distinguished career at Oxford, where he was professor of the
philosophy of physics until his retirement; and French went to the
United States and then back to England where he was Editor-in-Chief of

The British Journal for the Philosophy of Science
 and is now
professor of philosophy of science (emeritus) at the University of
Leeds. Brown and French have each served terms as presidents of the
prestigious British Society for the Philosophy of Science. Happily,
all these international old members maintain productive ties with
Brazilian groups. CLE has continued to prosper over the last two
decades.



Philosophical activity has expanded in Brazil at many other
institutions since the 1990s, as described in the following
sections.


2.3 Andean Countries



As with the previous countries, the field developed a presence in the
Andean countries in the early days of professional philosophy of
science.



In Venezuela, Juan David García Bacca, a critic of Francisco
Franco, was forced to leave Spain and arrived in Caracas in 1946 after
periods in Ecuador and Mexico. He led a productive career at the
Faculty of Letters and Philosophy, Central University (
Universidad
Central de Venezuela
, UCV). In the mid-1930s, after completing a
doctoral dissertation on the logico-genetic structure of the physical
sciences, García Bacca joined the Vienna Circle. In Latin
America he became a prolific writer, his works including

Teoría de la relatividad
 (1941), 
La
física
 (1962), 
Historia filosófica de la
ciencia
 (1963), 
Teoría y metateoría de la
ciencia
, Vol. I (1977) and Vol II (1984). He remained a major
force in Caracas until 1971. In the 1970s and 1980s, Andrés
Kalnay led a small group interested in the foundations of quantum
mechanics, first at UCV’s School of Physics and then at
Venezuela’s leading center for scientific research,

Instituto Venezolano de Investigaciones Científicas
.
Presently UCV runs a master’s program in logic and philosophy of
science coordinated by Franklin Galindo.



Philosophy of science in Colombia has long-enduring ties with
Continental European schools, but analytic philosophy of science has
not been absent. Already in the 1950s Mario Laserna at 
Universidad
de los Andes
 (Uniandes), Bogotá, promoted the study of
logic and the scientific philosophy of Hans Reichenbach. Subsequently,
local groups, helped by international visitors, have played a
consistent role in the country, notably Gonzalo Munévar, a
Colombian philosopher of science now based in the United States, who
visits regularly his country.



Activity in Peru started early in the 1950s, as attested by gatherings
organized at 
Universidad Nacional Mayor de San Marcos
 (UNMSM,
Peru’s oldest university) and 
Sociedad Peruana de
Filosofía
, both in Lima. Broad interest is also reflected
in articles published in the 1950s and 1960s in the weekly literary
supplement of “
El Comercio
” by Oscar
Miró-Quesada, Francisco Miró-Quesada, and other
intellectuals interested in logic, science, and mathematics. Francisco
Miró-Quesada, the country’s leading philosopher, was one
of the pioneers in the development of modern philosophical logic and
science studies in Latin America, where he has indefatigably
encouraged hope in the power of human reason. Miró-Quesada
taught at UNMSM for more than two decades, and then at 
Universidad
Cayetano Heredia
 (UPCH) and other centers in the country. He also
headed institutes for philosophical research, first at 
Universidad
de Lima
 and subsequently at 
Universidad Ricardo Palma
.
Miró-Quesada was the author of numerous works in the area of
philosophy of science, including a book in the philosophy of
mathematics, 
Filosofía de las Matemáticas

(1954). He has also been a champion of research in logic in the region
(it was Miró-Quesada who suggested to name Newton da
Costa’s approach “paraconsistent logic”, which he
helped to promote). Miró-Quesada’s most heartfelt project
focused on the study of human reason, regarded as the capacity to
reach truth, broadly understood, as outlined in his preliminary book

Apuntes para una Teoría de la Razón
 (1962),
followed in 2013 by 
Esquema de una Teoría de la
Razón
, in which Miró-Quesada discusses the pursuit
of rational validity in logic, science, metaphysics, and ethical
theory. In the early 1970s, young faculty trained in Europe and the
United States expanded and updated the philosophical study of science
in the country, particularly at UNMSM. Timely contributions were made,
especially by Luis Piscoya (philosophy of psychology and general
philosophy of science), Juan Abugattas (philosophy of science),
Julio-Cesar Sanz-Elguera (philosophy of science), and David Sobrevilla
(philosophy of the social sciences). Ever since, at San Marcos,
Luís Piscoya has been working on the interface between
philosophy of science and education; he is the author of

Investigación Científica y Educacional: un Enfoque
Epistemológico
 (1995), and numerous papers (e.g., Piscoya,
1993). In the late 1970s, an innovative program in philosophy opened
at UPCH, one of the leading research universities in the subcontinent.
Under Francisco Miró-Quesada, many international workshops,
seminars, and courses took place in Lima as part of this venture. From
the late 1980s on, activity at UPCH continued through a program named
“Scientific Thought”, headed by Alberto Cordero, with the
collaboration of Sandro D’Onofrio and other faculty members.



In Chile, meanwhile, Gerold Stahl, Nathan Stemmer, and Augusto
Pescador made logic a major field in Chile in the 1960s. Later in the
decade, Roberto Torretti published a seminal book, 
Manuel Kant.
Estudio sobre los Fundamentos de la Filosofía
Crítica
 (1967; revised edition 2005). His subsequent work
on Kant led him to wider research on the philosophical history of
science, a field that had a growing audience, especially in Santiago.
However, life in Chile became increasingly challenging as the decade
progressed. In 1970 Torretti left to Puerto Rico, where he continued
to develop his philosophical work, especially on nineteenth-century
geometry and the theory of relativity. In 1973 a ruthless military
dictatorship took over the government. It was a difficult time for
academia; Chile’s leading journal, 
Revista de
Filosofía
, ceased publication and remained dormant until
1977. Although the institutional environment suffered greatly at most
centers, quality research continued in logic, as evidenced by
internationally acclaimed contributions during the period by Rolando
Chuaqui and others.



Nearly always based in Latin American centers (Chile and Puerto Rico),
Torretti is an icon of rigor and philosophical sense and an author of
world-class level contributions; his writings are celebrated for his
insightful commentaries and educated perspectives on the rational
development of ideas, especially in Galileo, Newton, Leibniz, Kant,
nineteenth-century mathematics, Helmholtz, Poincaré, and
Einstein. Torretti’s major publications on these subjects have a
secure place on the reading lists of leading seminars in philosophy of
science anywhere, in particular 
Philosophy of Geometry from
Riemann to Poincaré
 (1978), 
Relativity and
Geometry
 (1985), 
Creative Understanding: Philosophical
Reflections on Physics
 (1990), and 
The Philosophy of
Physics
 (1999), each an authoritative work in the philosophy and
the philosophical history of science. In the years that Torretti spent
at the Rio Piedras Campus of 
Universidad de Puerto Rico
, he
led a fruitful career until his retirement in 1995. During most of
this period he was the editor of 
Diálogos
, one of the
leading philosophy journals in Latin America. Cristian Soto (2023a)
provides the most comprehensive analysis of Torretti’s views in
general philosophy of science, encompassing his nominalism in
philosophy of mathematics, his Kantian views on objectivity, his
elaboration of the creative understanding thesis, and his
understanding of HPS’ contribution to knowledge. A book-length
celebration of Roberto Torretti’s place in the philosophy of
science was published under the title 
Current Debates in
Philosophy of Science: In Honor of Roberto Torretti
 (Soto 2023b)
with contributions by a broad range of Latin American scholars
(including Pablo Acuña, Jonas Arenhart, Alejandro Cassini, Aldo
Filomeno, Sebastian Fortin, and Olimpia Lombardi), and leading
philosophers from around the world.


2.4 Argentina and Uruguay



On the eastern side of the southern cone, developments of considerable
international impact took place in Argentina between the 1940s and
1970s. The arrival of Hans Lindemann in the 1940s marked a turning
point in analytic philosophy in Argentina where his discussions of the
philosophy of Bertrand Russell and the Vienna Circle (he had studied
under Moritz Schlick and been a member of the Circle) encouraged
further activity, in particular research seminars and courses by Mario
Bunge, Gregorio Klimovsky, and Julio Rey Pastor. Throughout the 1950s,
the Buenos Aires area enjoyed a decade of optimism about the academic
and cultural possibilities of philosophy of science and its
applications. Several centers prospered, particularly two that were
founded in 1952. In one of them, 
Instituto Libre de Estudios
Superiores
, Klimovsky and Rolando García discussed the
“logical empiricist” approach and gave courses that
systematically presented the new philosophy to wider audiences. The
other center was 
Círculo Filosófico
, led by
Bunge, where his book 
Causalidad
 (1959a) and other works of
the period took shape, and their central materials were presented in
lectures and discussions. Bunge and Klimovsky managed to secure chairs
at 
Universidad de Buenos Aires
 (UBA) in philosophy of science
and logic, respectively. In the mid-1950s, their research and courses
turned the university into a world-class place in the field.
Bunge’s administrative and cultural efforts during this period
put a strong emphasis on making professional philosophical activity
possible in Argentina. A new association for logic and scientific
philosophy, 
Agrupación Rioplatense de Lógica y
Filosofía Científica
, was founded in 1956, aimed at
drawing together thinkers from Argentina and Uruguay who wanted to
study philosophy in the rational and rigorous style of the new
approach, with Bunge, Klimovsky, Jorge Bosch, Gino Germani, and
Rolando Garcia among its members. A consistent group began to form,
resulting in such achievements as 
Cuadernos de
Epistemología
, a series that gave the whole of Latin
America and Spain access to key works in the field translated into
Spanish.



In 
Causalidad
, Bunge (1959a) focused on the empiricist
conception of causality and its shortcomings, blaming the empiricist
outlook for having created unnecessary confusion and pessimism in
philosophy. In this work Bunge distinguishes causal determination from
other forms of determination (structural, teleological, dialectical,
and statistical), telling apart three different senses in which the
term “causality” enters scientific discourse—as a
law stating that same causes produce same effects, as a relation
between cause and effect, and as a principle stating that everything
has a cause. The book came out in 1959, gaining considerable
international reception, especially due to the realist conception it
articulates. 
Causality
 also marks a turning point: philosophy
books one may call “classics” were now coming out of Latin
America and finding a place in mainstream reading lists in the
English-speaking world and Europe. A citizen of the world, perhaps the
most universalist of philosophers in the subcontinent, Bunge is
nonetheless very South American (it is hard to imagine him growing up
anywhere else but in cosmopolitan Argentina). Bunge has always been a
socially engaged intellectual, a trend already present in his efforts
as founder and secretary general of a college for workers,

Universidad Obrera Argentina
, from 1938 until 1943. He has
remained a spirited spokesman for the need to maintain in Latin
America cultural and educational institutions capable of promoting the
practice of philosophy by minds free from ideological pressure,
financial oppression, and political or governmental control. First in
Argentina and then elsewhere, Bunge has been at “war”
against, as he puts it, the kind of uncritical understanding of
philosophy he found prevailing at the Faculty of Philosophy and
Letters when he joined in the 1950s, laboring to inspire a lasting
sense of professional rigor in his students and collaborators. The
series he launched, 
Cuadernos de Epistemología
, had a
substantial impact on scientists, philosophers, and the educated
public in the Spanish-speaking world. Bunge’s production during
these years was remarkable; apart from 
Causality
, other works
of relevance are Bunge (1959b, 1960, 1961a, 1961b, 1962a, and 1962b).
Unfortunately, these accomplishments were not achieved without
friction with colleagues and groups sympathetic to alternative ideas
Bunge could not respect. In addition, the country’s political
and economic conditions were deteriorating. Early in the 1960s,
internal fractions within the Argentine army began to make civic life
increasingly difficult. Bunge left the country in 1963, first to the
United States (where the Vietnam War and other political developments
made him uncomfortable), then moving in 1966 to McGill University,
Montreal, where he remains until his death.



Few thinkers associated with analytic philosophy strive to produce a
comprehensive philosophical system. Bunge is one of them, a thinker
trying to integrate ontology, metaphysics, epistemology, semantics,
psychology, and science coherently and fruitfully. Thus far
Bunge’s publications make more than fifty books and hundreds of
philosophical and scientific articles, mostly in English and Spanish;
his main works were also translated into German, Italian, Russian,
French, Hungarian, and Portuguese among other languages. His works of
greatest impact in mainstream philosophy of science are arguably

Causality
 (1959a), 
The Myth of Simplicity
 (1963),
and 
Foundations of Physics
 (1967). Bunge’s search for a
naturalist vision worth having was given systematic expression in his

Treatise on Basic Philosophy
 (an eight-volume work published
between 1974 and 1989). More recent publications by Bunge include

Emergence and Convergence: Qualitative Novelty and the Unity of
Knowledge
 (2003), 
Chasing Reality: Strife over Realism

(2006), and 
Medical Philosophy: Conceptual Issues in Medicine

(2013), as well as his much-awaited autobiography 
Memorias entre
Dos Mundos
 (2014), to mention a fraction of his abundant
production.



In his oral presentations and seminars, Bunge pays forceful and
particular attention to the evaluation of the arguments at hand,
championing the use of logic as an expediter of clarity of thought. He
is renowned for his scathing critiques of positions that demean
reason, the search for truth, and the universality of science,
scientific naturalism, as well as positions that fail to respect human
beings as individuals. Bunge enthusiastically endorses the way in
which the Enlightenment tried to disseminate conceptual and moral
tools to revise and improve human thought and life in general.
Bunge’s works steadily emphasize the idea that science can lead
(and has often led) to what he regards as the only sensible foundation
for social and political action: relevant knowledge of the world.
Importantly, early on in Latin America Bunge played the role of a
much-needed exemplar, a leading thinker who in the 1960s became a
“possibility proof” that philosophers working in the
subcontinent could, despite the often bizarre difficulties academics
face, stand up and join the philosophical conversation at the highest
levels. No Latin American philosopher had achieved anything comparable
before in cosmopolitan philosophy.



Losing Bunge was a major blow, one of many as the decade unfolded.
When the military intervened the universities in 1966, many of the
most talented minds in science and the humanities fled the country.
Klimovsky remained, however, and his presence helped keep the
discipline active during this difficult period, first at UBA and then
at Belgrano University from the late 1970s until his death. Philosophy
of science did not stop in Argentina, young talent continuing to
arise, notably Alberto Coffa, at Universidad de la Plata until he too
left to the United States. The surrounding turmoil was a negative
factor, yet a remarkable period of expansion began at the end of the
decade, marked by the foundation of the 
Sociedad Argentina de
Análisis Filosofico
 (SADAF), a model institution supported
by its own members, in which fellows and invited international guests
meet around topics of philosophical interest, including many of
central importance in philosophy of science. A major journal saw the
light in Buenos Aires in 1975: 
Revista Latinoamericana de
Filosofía
, followed in 1981 by another important
periodical, 
Análisis Filosófico
.



Activity in philosophy of science has grown in the country since then,
as the remaining sections of this article describe.


3. General Philosophy of Science



Spanish-language readers interested in the philosophy of science in
Ibero-America (Latin America and Spain) are encouraged to read the
article by Alfredo Marcos and Ana Rosa Ransanz (2015), included in the
volume 
Filosofía Iberoamericana del Siglo XX.
Filosofía Teórica e Historia de la
Filosofía
, belonging to the 
Enciclopedia
Iberoamericana de Filosofía
.


3.1 Scientific Method



Although Gregorio Klimovsky was one of the founding fathers of the
philosophy of science in Argentina, he was still active until the
first decade of the twenty-first century. He introduced mathematical
logic and axiomatic set theory in Argentinian universities and
defended a hypothetico-deductive method close to that of Popper, not
only for natural sciences but also for social sciences. At the turn of
the century, he published three books in Spanish, which were very
relevant in university education (Klimovsky 1994; Klimovsky and
Hidalgo 1998; Klimovsky and Boido 2005). Moreover, his autobiography
(2008) presents a vivid portrayal of the inception of analytic
philosophy of science in Argentina. But perhaps the most important
merit of Klimovsky was having been the teacher of several generations
of Argentine logicians and philosophers of science such as
Tomás Moro Simpson, Raúl Orayen, and Alberto Coffa.



The interest in Popper’s theses reappears in the work of Carlos
Verdugo (2009). In turn, Ambrosio Velasco Gómez (2023) focuses
on Popper’s concepts of tradition and situational analysis. By
contrast, Alejandro Cassini (2003, in Spanish) argues for the
advantages of the Bayesian theory of confirmation over the
hypothetico-deductive method.



The semantic approach to the concept of scientific theory was studied
by Ana Rosa Pérez Ransanz (1985), who compared van
Fraassen’s proposal with that of the structuralist school; that
work, originally published in Spanish and English, was immediately
commented by van Fraassen (1985) in an article published in the same
journal. The comparison between the semantic view and the
structuralist view was revisited several years later by Germán
Guerrero Pino (2008, 2010, in Spanish). In turn, Juan Manuel Jaramillo
Uribe (2009, 2014, in Spanish) built a bridge between metatheoretical
structuralism with other philosophical schools, such as French
structuralism and structural realism. Pablo Lorenzano has also
developed a sustained work in the field of metatheoretical
structuralism (Balzer and Lorenzano 2000; Lorenzano and Díez
2002, in Spanish; Lorenzano 2013), particularly applied to biology,
leading a research group with young members of different Latin
American countries.



From a pragmatist perspective, Pérez Ransanz and Cristina Di
Gregori (2012) analyze the complex and multifaceted nature of human
creativity in science and in art, arguing that the mystery that still
surrounds the creativity phenomenon arises largely from a poor
understanding of the nature of experience, especially of emotional
experience.


3.2 Rationality and Theory Choice



We noted that Francisco Miró-Quesada’s most heartfelt
project focused on the study of human reason, regarded as the capacity
to reach truth in logic, science, metaphysics, and ethical theory
(1962, 2013, in Spanish). In turn, from a perspective that defends
rationality against the attacks of postmodern thought, Ricardo
Gómez (2003, in Spanish) develops a strong criticism to
Rorty’s arguments. A very radical position is adopted by Gonzalo
Munévar (1981) who considers the rationality of science a
social property that should be understood in terms of biological
performance.



In Mexico the interest in the rationality of science led to the
publication of two relevant volumes in Spanish on the subject, one
compiled by Ambrosio Velasco Gómez (1997) and the other by Ana
Rosa Pérez Ransanz and Velasco Gómez (2011); the second
contains more than 40 contributions of Iberoamerican authors and
offers a wide picture of the discussion on the matter in the region.
Velasco Gómez also discusses the relationship between
rationality and the method of science and proposes a new concept of
rationality (2015a), common to science and art, based on the
dialectical tension between creative innovation and consensus (2012).
In turn, Sergio Martínez (2003, in Spanish) focuses on the
relationship between rationality and scientific practices.



More recently, problems of the empirical equivalence between theories
and the underdetermination of theory choice were addressed by Pablo
Acuña, particularly in the case of Lorentz’s ether theory
and Einstein’s special relativity (Acuña and Dieks 2014;
Acuña 2014a). Acuña (2014b) also analyses three
artificial cases of empirical equivalence, arguing that they are not
the result of practice of real science but cooked up by philosophers
of science.


3.3 Dynamics of Science



Due to his close collaboration with Jean Piaget (Piaget and
García 1971, 1987), Rolando García became the author who
still represents genetic epistemology in Latin America (1997). In
particular, he developed with Piaget the idea of a parallelism between
psychogenesis and the evolution of sciences (Piaget and García
1983). More recently, García (2000) linked genetic epistemology
with the theory of complex systems.



Already in the nineties, Oscar Nudler began to develop a view of the
dynamics of science in terms of conflicts (1990). This view became a
well-articulated model based on what he called “controversy
space” (Nudler 2002, 2004, in Spanish): a dynamic structure
composed of inter-related controversies, with a “focus”,
composed by the issues that are the main object of the disagreements,
and a “common ground”, which consists of the commitments
not subject to discussion within the controversy space. Controversy
spaces typically change by re-focalization which occurs when certain
assumptions move from the common ground to the focus. This model was
successfully applied to different scientific cases, such as the
origins of chaos theory, the debate about the relations between
chemistry and physics, the origins of molecular biology, and the
development of twentieth century American linguistics, among others
(see Nudler 2011).



The philosophy of Thomas Kuhn attracted the interest of many Latin
American philosophers of science. For instance, during the 1980s, some
Cuban scholars focused on the Kuhnian concept of scientific revolution
(Núñez Jover 1985, 1989, in Spanish). In Uruguay, Mario
Otero (1997) edited a volume in Spanish about Kuhn with contributions
from his research group. After his retirement, the group was left in
the hands of Lucía Lewowicz, who continued that line of
research (2004, 2005, in Spanish), focusing particularly on the
Kuhnian notion of taxonomic category (2007, in Spanish). In Colombia,
the research group of Jaramillo Uribe also compiled a collective
volume in Spanish devoted to the philosophy of Kuhn (Jaramillo Uribe
et al. 1997) and, in a more recent book also in Spanish, Guerrero Pino
(2003) considered the relevance of the Kuhnian philosophy for science
education. Recently, Pablo Lorenzano (2023a) revisited the Kuhnian
concept of paradigm, and Pablo Melogno and Leandro Giri (2023)
examined Kuhn’s sources that had been understudied so far: the
Lowell Lectures of 1951 (
The Quest for Physical Theory
) and
the unpublished Notre Dame Lectures of 1980. Melogno (2022) also
offered a comparative analysis of Kuhn’s historiographical
assumptions in 
The Copernican Revolution
 and 
The
Structure of Scientific Revolutions
. In Argentina, Nélida
Gentile (2013) published a book in Spanish on incommensurability
commemorating the 50th anniversary of 
The Structure
. The book

Kuhn y el Cambio Científico
, by Ana Rosa Pérez
Ransanz (1999), deserves particular attention, for it has been much
discussed in the Spanish-speaking world and, as a consequence, was
reprinted two times (2000, 2012). More recently, Melogno,
Hernán Miguel, and Giri (2022) edited a volume that revisits
the impact and implications of Kuhn’s philosophy from a
contemporary perspective. 



After getting his Ph.D. under the supervision of Paul Feyerabend,
Gonzalo Munévar became one of the main international
specialists on the philosophy of the author (see the compilation of
his articles in Munévar 2006, in Spanish). Moreover,
Munévar (1998) advocates for an evolutionary philosophy that
leads to a thorough evolutionary relativism of scientific knowledge
which, nevertheless, is not an obstacle to a theory of relative truth.
From a different and original perspective, Carlos David Suárez
Pascal (2021) proposes a biosemiotic and evolutionary conception of
theories, based on an analysis and comparison of philosopher Norwood
Russell Hanson’s account of theories and zoologist Jakob von
Uexküll’s theory of organisms (see also Suárez
Pascal 2017).


3.4 Scientific Realism



Christián Carman worked extensively on the problem of realism
in science. He offered a detailed elucidation of the term
“scientific realism” (2005a, in Spanish), and he
considered the theoretical-observational distinction in light of the
problem of realism (2005b, in Spanish). Carman also critically
analyzed Harré’s inductive argument for scientific
realism (2005c, in Spanish). Moreover, he reformulated the no-miracle
argument in order to apply it to simultaneous predictions (2010a, in
Spanish), in particular in the context of Ptolemy’s planetary
theory (Carman and Díez 2015). More recently, Carman appealed
to specific case studies to discuss scientific realism. For example,
together with Gonzalo Recio and the Spanish philosopher José
Díez, he considers Ptolemy’s successful prediction of
Mars’ orbit from Kepler’s perspective (Díez, Recio,
and Carman 2022), and stresses the challenge that scientific realism
poses to the hypothesis of Intelligent Design (Carman 2022a).



Some surveys of the arguments regarding the problem of realism were
also produced in Spanish. For instance, Bruno Borge (2015)
reconsidered the no-miracle argument 40 years after its formulation,
and Borge and Nélida Gentile (2019) compiled a volume on the
subject with contributions from Latin American authors.



Recently, the work of Anjan Chakravartty has aroused the interest of
some authors. For instance, Gentile and Susana Lucero (2021) have
focused on the unifying and explanatory power of the selective realism
defended by Chakravartty, and Soto and Romero (2020) have argued for
local selective realism, which aims at providing a tool for defending
realism in the transition from classical to quantum electrodynamics.
In turn, Adriana Spehrs (2021) analyzes Chakravartty’s
dispositionalist account of properties in order to assess whether
ontological pluralism can meet the challenge that conflicting models
pose to the scientific realism.



In the last decade, several authors have dealt specifically with the
metaphysics of science. Cristián Soto has examined the current
state of the metaphysics of science debate (Soto 2015), as well as the
distinction between locally and globally applied naturalistic
metaphysics (Soto 2017). Diego Romero, Federico Benitez, and Soto
(2018) have developed a proposal for a coherent ontology of
fundamental entities drawing from the distinction between interaction
and framework theories. Another author who is particularly interested
in the metaphysics of science by focusing on disagreements is Bruno
Borge, who claims that some disagreements about scientific ontology
are better understood when epistemic goals and values are taken into
account (Borge 2021a), and considers the question of how scientific
peers should revise their beliefs (if at all) upon recognized
disagreement (Borge and Lo Guercio 2021). In turn, Jonas Becker
Arenhart and Raoni Wohnrath Arroyo address the problem of metaphysical
underdetermination to conclude that the available meta-metaphysical
criteria fail to deliver objectivity in theory choice (Arenhart and
Arroyo 2021) and claim that what is currently thought of as
scientifically respectful metaphysics may end up also being without
epistemic value (Arroyo and Arenhart 2022a).


3.5 Pluralisms in Science



After the strong influence of logical empiricism and its claim for the
“unity of science”, in the last decades of the twentieth
century many pluralist approaches were proposed from different
perspectives. In Latin America, different pluralistic views have been
advanced.



Although Félix Schuster was a student of Mario Bunge and
Gregorio Klimovsky, he directed his interest to social sciences. In
this field, he defends methodological pluralism as the way to access
social reality (Schuster 1992, in Spanish).



Roberto Torretti’s view of scientific knowledge finds its roots
in his interpretation of Kant’s philosophy (Torretti 1967).
According to Torretti, it does not follow from the transcendental
deduction of the categories that they are contained in a definitive
and immutable list; by admitting that the patterns ruling the
constitution of the objects of knowledge may change, “Kant opens
a wide door to intellectual pluralism” (2008: 87). From this
perspective, Torretti (2000) explicitly rejects the scientific realism
that conceives the aim of science as the development of a discourse
that “cuts reality at its joints” and agrees with Hilary
Putnam’s pragmatic realism (Putnam 1987) on the basis of some
examples drawn from past and present scientific practice.



Also under the influence of Putnam, but now of his internal realism
(Putnam 1981), Olimpia Lombardi and Ana Rosa Pérez Ransanz
(2012, in Spanish) propose an ontological pluralism that, instead of
being applied to the problem of theory change, finds its main
fertility in a synchronic sense: when theories embodying different
conceptual schemes are simultaneously accepted, it must be admitted
that different ontologies may coexist since each one of them is
constituted by its corresponding theory. This view, which denies the
ontological dependence of the supposedly “secondary”
disciplines or “phenomenological” theories regarding those
fields conceived as “fundamental”, has been applied to the
relationship between chemistry and physics with the purpose of
defending the ontological autonomy of the chemical world (Lombardi and
Labarca 2005); this view has sparked an intense debate in the field of
the philosophy of chemistry (it will be considered below, in the
subsection about the philosophy of chemistry). Lombardi has further
developed this Kantian-rooted ontological pluralism by stressing its
pragmatic content (2023a) and by distinguishing between diachronic and
synchronic ontological pluralisms (2023b).


3.6 Representation in Science



The role played by models in science was studied in Latin America
since the first years of the twentieth century. In México,
Alfredo López Austin (2005) compiled a volume including five
contributions that explore the meaning and the nature of scientific
models. More recently, Mario Casanueva and Ximena
González-Grandón (2016) edited a special issue of the
journal 
Scientiae Studia
, whose articles fall into two
groups: those in the first group emphasize that models amplify our
capacities of representation, perception, and calculation; those in
the second stress the function of models in legitimating scientific
knowledge.



Alejandro Cassini also paid close attention to the nature of
scientific models. In particular, he criticizes fictionalism, which
conceives models as useful fictions (Cassini 2013), and contends that
every scientific model has a target against those who claim that some
models do not (Cassini 2018). In turn, Hernán Accorinti
discussed the problem of the autonomy of models with respect to
theories, with applications to chemistry, in particular, to the
different models of electronegativity (Accorinti 2019) and, in
collaboration with Juan Camilo Martínez González, to
molecular models in quantum chemistry, with special attention to the
role played by the Born-Oppenheimer approximation (Accorinti and
Martínez González 2022).



In this field, Natalia Carrillo has developed a fruitful collaboration
with Tarja Knuuttila. They adopt an artifactual approach according to
which idealizations are holistic in nature, that is, they cannot be
locally undone without dismantling the model (Carrillo and Knuuttila
2021, 2022). And they argue that mechanical philosophy in life
sciences, which involves the decomposition of a system into its parts,
does not suit models whose epistemic strategy is not decompositional
(Carrillo and Knuuttila 2023).



Although not directly concerned with models, an interesting volume in
Spanish about the epistemic role of images in science was published as
the result of a workshop held in Mexico City in 2007 (Casanueva and
Bolaños 2009). In the introduction to the volume, the editors
refer to the “
pictorial turn
” to stress the
increasing relevance of pictorial representation as an epistemic
vehicle for science, where “pictorial” includes not only
visual pictures but also tactile and auditory representations. In this
context it is worth mentioning the role of metaphors in science:
Sergio Martínez and Carrillo discuss examples from the history
of science that illustrate different ways in which metaphors play a
role in scientific innovation (Martínez and Carrillo 2022) and
stress the relation between metaphors and abstraction (Carrillo and
Martínez 2023).



In the domain of physics, Pablo Acuña (2023) presents the
development of astronomical models from Eudoxus to Kepler as a
case-study that vindicates Henk de Regt’s account of scientific
understanding. In the field of biology, Chabel El-Hani, in
collaboration with several authors working outside Latin America
(Poliseli et al. 2022), addresses the contributions of the recent
mechanistic philosophy of science to the scientific practice of model
building in ecology.


3.7 Causation and Laws of Nature



Although Mario Bunge’s already classical book 
Causality

(1959a) was a landmark in the study of causation, it was only several
decades later that the interest on causation took off in the region.
Eduardo Flichman developed a “deflationist” view of
causation according to which causation is not an ontological relation
between events but an anthropomorphic asymmetric relation that
speakers project over reality. From this perspective, Flichman (1989)
criticized the counterfactual theory of causation proposed by David
Lewis (1973) by showing that clear cases of causation can be
meaningfully reversed and, therefore, challenge the supposed asymmetry
of causation.



This criticism sparked an interesting debate in the Mexican journal

Critica
 during the 1990s. Dorothy Edgington (1990) accepted
Flichman’s criticism as an argument against the possibility of
analyzing the concept of causation. Horacio Abeledo (1995), in turn,
showed that there would be a “formal” way out of
Flichman’s criticism, but with no philosophical support. From an
opposite perspective, Helen Beebee (1997) explicitly responded to
Flichman’s argument and to Abeledo’s conclusion by arguing
that the putative counter-example presented by Flichman is not in fact
a counter-example after all. Both Flichman and Abeledo reacted to
Beebee’s paper. On the basis of a refutation of Beebee’s
argument, Flichman (2000) elaborated on his criticism of Lewis’s
theory and his defense of an acausal position. Finally, Abeledo (2000)
offered a clear and detailed summary of the whole controversy, adding
new arguments against Beebee’s view but stressing his
disagreements with Flichman’s position.



Other Latin American authors were interested in causation. For
example, Sergio Martínez (1997, in Spanish) provides a detailed
review of the role of causation in scientific explanation along the
history of science. In Santiago de Chile, Wilfredo Quezada Pulido
leads a research group mainly devoted to study physical causation. In
his published works in Spanish, Quesada Pulido compares the theories
of causal transference, of causal processes, and of conserved
quantities (2002), and analyzes the manipulability theory of causation
in the light of the problem of anthropomorphism (2007). More recently,
Fernanda Samaniego uses the manipulability approach to define a notion
of “explanatory depth” (2014) and to account for spin-echo
experiments (2013, 2015). More recently, by appealing to the example
of ideal gases, Samaniego (2022) discusses James Woodward’s
article “Flagpoles anyone? Causal and explanatory
asymmetries”.



His work on causation led Flichman (1990, 1995) to discuss the concept
of scientific law: according to him, the distinction between laws of
nature and accidental uniformities depends on the role they play in a
scientific theory; moreover “hard” and “soft”
accidental uniformities must be carefully distinguished because the
latter are frequently confused with laws of nature. Pablo Lorenzano
(1998, 2007, in Spanish) also reflects upon the concept of law of
nature in relation to the existence of biological laws.



In 2019, Bruno Borge and Renato Cani edited a special issue of the
Brazilian journal 
Principia
 devoted to laws of nature, which
included contributions of Cristián Soto, who, in collaboration
with Otavio Bueno (Soto and Bueno 2019), proposes an inferential
conception of physical laws, which draws from the epistemic
indispensability argument in philosophy of mathematics (Soto 2019);
and of Nélida Gentile (2019), who presents some drawbacks faced
by the regularity view of Mill-Ramsey-Lewis, by Armstrong’s
necessitarian view and by Mumford’s realist lawlessness.



In recent years, Aldo Filomeno has analyzed the much-discussed
Humeanism about natural laws. The author shares the Humean spirit when
claiming that the apparently non-accidental regularities are the
result of a statistical necessity rather than of a primitive physical
necessity (Filomeno 2019). By highlighting the unjustified implicit
assignment of equiprobability to each possible Humean mosaic, Filomeno
(2021) concludes that the “cosmic coincidence” objection
to Humeanism should not be dismissed. Filomeno (2023) also argues that
Humean supervenience does not need to endorse a standard version of
truthmaker maximalism and, therefore, Humean supervenience and the
Growing-Block Universe are compatible.


3.8 Philosophical History of Science



The history of science from a philosophical perspective has been
extensively studied in Latin America. For instance, in Argentina
Guillermo Boido has strongly promoted the area; his book in Spanish on
Galileo (Boido 1996) not only offers a historical narrative, but also
explains historiographic discussions in light of the historical
record. In Colombia, Mauricio Nieto Olarte (2000, 2007) developed
relevant research work in Spanish on the origins of science in the
region during the colonial period. In Mexico, Laura Benítez
published several works in Spanish on early science (e.g.,
Benítez 1993, 2000, 2004), and developed a long and fruitful
collaboration with José Antonio Robles about science in
modernity (e.g., Benítez and Robles 2000, 2006; Robles and
Benítez 2004). More recently, Benítez (2019) focused on
the methodological framework within which Sor Juana Inés de la
Cruz examines sensibility and understanding. Also in México,
Godfrey Guillaumin studied the historical evolution of the notion of
scientific evidence (2005, in Spanish) and the deep cognitive changes
generated by measurements in the Scientific Revolution (2017).



Some philosophers of science of the region also manifested their
interest in particular events of the history of science. For instance,
Pablo Mariconda analyzed Galileo’s tide theory (1999, in
Portuguese), the simple machines designed by Galileo (2008, in
Portuguese), and Galileo’s argument for the autonomy of science
(Lacey and Mariconda 2012); he also studied the method of astronomy
according to Kepler (Tossato and Mariconda 2010, in Portuguese). In
turn, Carlos Alberto Cardona Suárez examined the methodology
used by Kepler to discover a quantitative law of refraction (Cardona
Suárez 2016; Cardona Suárez and Gutiérrez
Valderrama 2020). By contrast, Sergio Orozco-Echeverri focused his
work on the impact and repercussions of Renaissance science and
modernity in the Iberian-American world (Orozco-Echeverri and
Molina-Betancur 2019, 2021; Orozco-Echeverri 2023).



In turn, Alejandro Cassini and Marcelo Levinas developed a fruitful
collaboration mainly published in Spanish, studying different aspects
of the history of physics at the beginning of twentieth century,
particularly regarding Einstein’s works: Einstein’s
reinterpretation of Michelson-Morley experiment (Cassini and Levinas
2005), his explanations of photoelectric effect (Cassini and Levinas
2008; Cassini, Levinas, and Pringe 2015) and of the Compton effect
(Cassini, Levinas, and Pringe 2013), his reinterpretation of Fizeau
experiment (Cassini and Levinas 2019), as well as the role played by
the ether in the conceptual change to special relativity (Cassini and
Levinas 2009). In the quantum context, Olival Freire Jr. (2015)
published a book that traces the passionate foundational controversies
that accompanied the ripening of quantum physics during the second
half of the twentieth century.



Elías Fuentes Guillén focused his interest on Bolzano.
He reports Bolzano’s postulation to the chair of Elementary
Mathematics at Prague University (Fuentes Guillén and Crippa
2021) and studies Bolzano’s contributions to logic (Fuentes
Guillén 2023) and to mathematics (Fuentes Guillén and
Martínez Adame 2020; Bair et al. 2020, 2022).



The history of biological sciences has been the interest of Ana
Barahona, who focused mainly on the case of Mexico: with different
colleagues, she considers how European ideas about human species and
race in the scientific mainstream were deployed in the very
distinctive situations of Mexico (Torrens and Barahona 2019), she
analyzes the teaching of biological evolution in Mexican socialist
textbooks in the 1930s (Torrens, Rodríguez Caso, and Barahona
2021), and she recalls the first time that cytogenetic techniques had
been used in the Olympics in Mexico in 1968 (Barahona 2022). From a
more general viewpoint, she offers a critical and comparative review
of the historiographical studies on biogeography
(Bueno-Hernández, Barahona, et al. 2023). For a more detailed
report of the history of biology in the region, see the entry
“Philosophy of Biology in Latin America” (Lorenzano
2023).



The works of Christián Carman deserve a special mention, since
their quantity and quality turn him to be considered a first level
international specialist in ancient astronomy. Precisely because of
the volume of his production, here we will only refer to a selection.
Carman’s first works focused on Ptolemy’s calculations and
explanations (Carman 2009, 2010a, 2015; Recio and Carman 2018), making
him an international expert on Ptolemy. His interest was also directed
to other authors, such as Aristarchus (2014), Martianus Capella
(2016), Copernicus (2017a), and Heraclides of Pontus (2017b). In a
further line of research, Carman’s collaboration with the
renowned scholar James Evans for the detailed study of the Antikythera
mechanism resulted in several very relevant works (Evans, Carman, and
Thorndike 2010; Carman, Thorndike, and Evans 2012; Carman and Evans
2014; Evans and Carman 2019). More recently, Carman turned his
attention to technical aspects of Tycho Brahe’s work (2020,
2021, 2022b; Carman and Recio 2022) and to the accuracy of
Kepler’s results (Carman 2022c; Pelegrin and Carman 2019).


3.9 Science, Society, and Values



In Latin America, the discussions about science and values have
traditionally focused on the question of the dependence of scientific
research in Latin American countries on the agenda set by central
countries. Due to their local interest, most of the material was
written in Spanish. In 1971, a debate, remembered until today for its
philosophical and political significance, confronted Oscar Varsavsky
and Gregorio Klimovsky in Argentina. For Varsavsky (1971), since
science is essentially ideology-laden, ideology must appear explicitly
in scientific policy as a guide toward a new social order. Klimovsky
(1971), by contrast, advocated for a neutral basic science: politics
appear mostly in the application of scientific knowledge. The original
debate was complemented with the contribution of other prominent
Argentine thinkers and appeared in 1975 as the book 
Ciencia y
Ideología. Aportes polémicos
 (Klimovsky et al.
1975). In the same year, Jorge Sabato (1975) compiled a significant
book with articles by more than twenty specialists about ideology in
science, relations between science, technology, and society, the
structural scientific-technological dependence of Latin America, the
production of technology, and the planning of scientific-technological
development in Latin American countries. The lively debates of those
years were drastically interrupted by the military coup
d’ètat in Argentina in 1976.



The claim for a Latin American science, guided by regional interests
and ideological views, is in resonance with those philosophical and
sociological studies, like that of Enrique Dussel (1995) which
denounces the Eurocentric “myth of modernity” that
justifies the superiority of European culture over Native American
cultures. In turn, the need to contextualize scientific knowledge in
the framework of social needs of a particular community also appears
in the works of Rolando García (1981) under the concept of
interdisciplinary research, that is, a research that combines
different theoretical approaches in the search for solving localized
social requirements. More recently, Ambrosio Velasco Gómez
(2004) has considered that moral and political questions are at the
core of the epistemological and methodological problems of scientific
theories, and that the widespread idea that political and even ethical
decisions should be based on scientific knowledge has strong
authoritarian implications. In turn, Mónica
Gómez-Salazar (2017) claims that cultural neutrality, based on
the idea of equality without any distinction of color, sex, language,
religion, or political opinion, really favors white racism and
cultural imperialism of the liberal way of life.



The interest in how social knowledge is produced in Latin America has
grown during the last decades. An example of this interest is the book
of Leandro Rodríguez Medina (2014) which examines the
circulation of knowledge within globalization, focusing on the
differences between centers and peripheries of knowledge production in
the social sciences, and in the ways in which foreign ideas shape
peripheral fields.



Two philosophers of science, who are well-known in the Latin American
communities, were also very interested in issues connected with social
and political values in science, although from different perspectives.
Since the 1990s, León Olivé (1988 [1993], in Spanish)
stood at the interface between the philosophy and the sociology of
knowledge, trying to explain the double nature of knowledge as a
social construct and a representation of reality. More recently, his
interest focused on how technology has pervaded contemporary society,
modeling both knowledge and values (Olivé 2007, in Spanish).
Ricardo Gómez, by contrast, develops his position in open
confrontation with neoliberalism (2002, 2017a, in Spanish). On this
basis, he considers that the ethical dimension of science and
technology should stand against neoliberal principles from a clear
political position (Gómez 2017b, in Spanish).



The interaction between scientific activities and values has been the
interest of Pablo Mariconda (Lacey and Mariconda 2014a, 2014b, in
Portuguese). In particular, Mariconda (2014) discusses the
technological risks associated with transgenic agriculture. Along the
same lines, Guillermo Folgera produced two works in Spanish in which
he analyzes the techno-scientific discourse regarding genetically
modified organisms (Folguera, Carrizo, and Massarini 2014) and
denounces the omission of risks in the use of such organisms (Francese
and Folguera 2018).



In the context of science, society, and values, studies that combine
the reflection upon scientific knowledge with gender matters must be
mentioned. For instance, Fabrizzio (now Siobhan) Guerrero Mc Manus
(2016) provides Spanish-speaking readers with an overview of a
feminism that seeks to develop a critical framework aimed at
detecting, exposing, and correcting the many gender biases nowadays
present in the sciences (see also Mc Manus 2019). In this context, the
works of Diana Maffía in Spanish cannot be forgotten since she
has critically analyzed the links between gender and science in the
past twenty years or so (e.g., Maffía 2001, 2005, 2006, 2007;
Rietti and Maffía 2005). More recently, Manuela
Fernández-Pinto has explored how dissent on gender bias in
academia affects science and society (Leuscher and
Fernández-Pinto 2021) and has highlighted the long and rich
history of the Latin American women’s participation in the
production of knowledge (Harding, Pérez-Bustos, and
Fernández-Pinto, 2019).



Mariana Córdoba approaches the problem of personal identity
from a philosophical and political perspective. She focuses on the
Argentinian Gender Identity Law in order to argue that gender identity
is biotechnologically and legally produced (Córdoba 2020). But
her main interest has been personal identity in the context of
children’s appropriation in Argentinian dictatorship
(Córdoba 2021; Córdoba, Ferreira Ruiz, and Alassia
2021).



During the last decade, Fernández-Pinto has developed an
extensive work on the links between science and society. In
particular, she has focused his interest on the social and epistemic
consequences of the current commercialization of scientific research
(2015a, 2015b, 2017, 2018, 2020a, 2020b). She also points out how
certain dissents are epistemically and socially detrimental as they
contribute to racism in society and to a social atmosphere that is
hostile to science (Leuscher and Fernández-Pinto 2022), and
explores ways of counteracting cognitive biases that lead scientists
to wrong conclusions (Fernández-Pinto 2023).


4. Philosophy of Particular Sciences


4.1 Philosophy of Physics



Although Mario Bunge and Roberto Torretti were central figures for the
philosophy of physics in Latin America, their early emigration
prevented them from starting research lines around their works. As a
consequence, the development of the philosophy of physics in the
region is relatively recent.



Quantum mechanics is one of the focuses of the research group led by
Olimpia Lombardi which developed its work in two directions: the
interpretation of the theory and the analysis of the meaning of
decoherence. Regarding the first topic, Lombardi and Mario Castagnino
proposed the Modal-Hamiltonian Interpretation of quantum mechanics: a
realist, non-collapse interpretation that endows the Hamiltonian with
a determining role. The interpretation proved to be effective in
explaining ideal and non-ideal measurements and many other well-known
physical situations such as hydrogen atom, Zeeman effect, fine
structure, etc. (Lombardi and Castagnino 2008). The interpretation was
reformulated in a Galilean invariant form (Ardenghi, Castagnino, and
Lombardi 2009; Lombardi, Castagnino, and Ardenghi 2010), and was
applied to further situations, such as the non-collapse account of
consecutive measurements in physics (Ardenghi, Lombardi, and Narvaja
2013), the understanding of quantum decoherence (Lombardi, Ardenghi,
Fortin, and Castagnino 2011), the view of quantum measurement in
informational terms (Lombardi, Fortin, and López 2015), and the
problem of optical isomerism in chemistry (Fortin, Lombardi, and
Martínez González 2016, 2018). More recently, the
interpretation served as a basis to define the time of quantum events
from a relational perspective (Fortin, Lombardi, and Pasqualini 2022).
In addition, the modal-Hamiltonian interpretation proposes a
bundle-of-properties ontology that adequately accounts for
contextuality and indistinguishability (da Costa, Lombardi, and
Lastiri 2013; da Costa and Lombardi 2014; Lombardi 2023c), but without
preventing the emergence of particles under certain particular
circumstances (Lombardi and Dieks 2016). This ontology of properties
has been formalized by means of Krause’s quasi-set theory
(Holik, Jorge, Krause, and Lombardi 2022), and has been applied to
solve the problem of entanglement in the case of indistinguishability
(Fortin and Lombardi 2022;Lombardi 2023d).



By stressing the distinction between collapse and decoherence, Osvaldo
Pessoa (1997) criticized the assumption that decoherence solves the
measurement problem. Following Pessoa’s view, Castagnino,
Sebastian Fortin, and Lombardi (2010) deepened the criticisms of the
orthodox approach to decoherence (see also Lombardi, Fortin, and
Castagnino 2012; Fortin and Lombardi 2014, 2017), proposed a new
approach for closed systems (Castagnino and Lombardi 2004; Fortin and
Lombardi 2018), and developed a general conceptual framework for
decoherence in closed and open systems (Castagnino, Laura, and
Lombardi 2007). Based on this new perspective, the research group
offered a particular view of the classical limit of quantum mechanics
(Castagnino and Lombardi 2005; Fortin and Lombardi 2016), applied it
to the problem of defining the quantum ergodic hierarchy (Castagnino
and Lombardi 2007), and stressed the role of the correspondence
principle in the understanding of decoherence (Fortin and Lombardi
2019).



In the subtle frontier between logic and physics, Décio Krause
developed an impressive work related to the quantum challenges to the
notions of identity and individuality. Already in his Ph.D.
dissertation, under the supervision of Newton da Costa, Krause
supplied a semantics to the so-called “Schrödinger
logic” (da Costa and Krause 1994, 1997) designed to account for
elementary quantum particles. This work led him to formulate his

quasi-set theory
 (Krause 1991, 1992, 1996a, 1996b), according
to which there are urelements for which identity makes no sense.
Krause’s semi-extensional quasi-set theory was compared with the
intensional quaset theory developed by Maria Luisa dalla Chiara and
Giuliano Toraldo di Francia (dalla Chiara, Giuntini, and Krause 1998),
and was applied to particular problems in the foundations of quantum
mechanics (Sant’Anna and Krause 1997; Krause, Sant’Anna,
and Volkov 1999; Krause 2000; Domenech, Holik, and Krause 2008).



Krause also developed an intense collaboration with Steven French to
develop a concept of individuality for the quantum ontology (Krause
and French 1995, 2007; French and Krause 1995, 1999, 2003); they also
advanced some ideas about individuality in quantum field theory
(French and Krause 2010). This collaboration gave rise to a very
relevant book on the matter (French and Krause 2006), which discusses
the problem of individuality in philosophy and in classical and
quantum physics and articulates quasi-set theory as a theory for
non-individuals.



More recently, Krause produced a relevant collaborative work with
Jonas Arenhart, his former Ph.D. student, about quantum
non-individuality (Krause and Arenhart 2012, 2016a; see also Arenhart
2017) and its compatibility with Einstein’s realism (Krause and
Arenhart 2014). They also examined the view of quantum particles as
individuals in a primitive sense (Arenhart and Krause 2014a, 2014b).
This collaboration led to a recent book about the logical foundations
of scientific theories (Krause and Arenhart 2016b). In his more recent
works, Krause continues analyzing the logic of indiscernibility: he
advocates for a metaphysics of non-individuals, conceived as entities
to which the standard theory of identity of classical logic and set
theory does not apply (Krause, Arenhart, and Bueno 2022, Krause 2023),
connects indistinguishability with contextuality (de Barros, Holik,
and Krause, 2022), and offers an interpretation of the quantifiers
that avoids the “collapse of quantifiers” when they
quantify over indiscernible objects (Krause 2022).



Still in the field of the interpretation of quantum mechanics,
Elías Okon and Daniel Sudarsky (2014a, 2014b) criticized Robert
Griffiths’s consistent histories approach by arguing that it is
interpretively vague and does not solve the measurement problem. These
works were rebutted by Griffiths (2015), and the rebuttal was
immediately answered by Okon and Sudarsky (2015a) by claiming that the
consistent histories interpretation introduces anthropomorphic terms
not contained in the formalism. In turn, based on Okon and
Sudarsky’s criticism, Marcelo Losada and Lombardi (2018) defend
a “formalism of contextual histories” which is free from
the shortcomings of Griffiths’s proposal.



Given the need for an observer-independent interpretation of quantum
mechanics for cosmology, Okon and Sudarsky (2014c) defended an
objective collapse theory for the application to cosmology and quantum
gravity and, on this basis, they proposed an adaptation of objective
collapse models to a general relativistic context (2018a). The authors
also examined the black hole information loss paradox as a situation
that can be accounted for by collapse interpretations (Okon and
Sudarsky 2015b, 2017, 2018b) and the status of the conservation
principles in different contexts, in particular, in semiclassical
gravity (Maudlin, Okon, and Sudarsky 2020).



Other interpretations of quantum mechanics have also drawn the
interest of Latin American authors. For instance, Ricardo
Muciño, Okon, and Sudarsky (2022) offer a strong criticism of
Rovelli’s Relational Quantum Mechanics, and Lombardi and Juan
Sebastián Ardenghi (2022) compare Relational Quantum Mechanics
and the Modal-Hamiltonian Interpretation. Arroyo and Arenhart (2022)
analyze the debate concerning the existence of worlds in Everettian
Quantum Mechanics. In turn, Jorge Manero focuses on Bohmian Mechanics:
in this context he proposes a relational notion of distinguishable
object that should be conceived from a structuralist point of view
(Manero 2021). Beyond the limits of Bohmian Mechanics, Manero (2019)
provides a formal and accurate description of the structural-based
ontology posited by classical mechanics, quantum mechanics, and
special relativity.



The Frauchiger-Renner argument, which sparked a heated debate since
its first presentation in 2016, was also analyzed by Latin American
philosophers of physics. According to Fortin and Lombardi (2020), the
argument leads to a dilemma: either it is an original way to reproduce
the proof of quantum contextuality, or it is illegitimate because it
appeals to inferences forbidden by the algebraic structure of quantum
propositions. From a similar perspective, Muciño and Okon
(2020) argue that all the lessons learned from the Frauchiger-Renner
result are essentially contained within the original EPR paper.



Other aspects and interpretations of quantum mechanics have also been
explored. For instance, Sergio Martínez discussed the physical
content of the Luders Rule (1990, 1991), Pessoa (2005) proposed a
modal logical treatment of quantum mechanics, and Pablo Acuña
(2016b) pointed out the difficulties in defining the notion of
inertial trajectory in Bohmian mechanics (Acuña 2019). In turn,
Rodolfo Gambini, Luis Pedro García-Pintos, and Jorge Pullin
(2010, 2011) devised an interpretation that offers a solution to the
quantum measurement problem based on the loss of coherence due to the
use of realistic clocks. Cristian López, in collaboration with
the Italian researcher Andrea Oldofredi, points out the limitations of
the much discussed distinction between Psi-ontic and Psi-epistemic
quantum models (Oldofredi and López 2020). Regarding
non-locality, Gerardo Sanjuán Ciepielewski, Okon, and Sudarsky
(2023) introduce a fully local and superdeterministic model that, by
explicitly violating “settings independence”, reproduces
the predictions of quantum mechanics. In turn, Pablo Acuña
revisits von Neumann’s Theorem and the recent debate about its
relevance (Acuña 2021a) and argues that the import of the
Kochen-Specker theorem gets substantially weakened when von
Neumann’s and Gleason’s theorems are taken into account
(Acuña 2021b). From a more general perspective, Acuña
(2021c) discusses what interpreting quantum mechanics means and
concludes that it supplies a case of predictively equivalent rival
theories.



The foundations of relativistic mechanics have also begun to awaken
the interest of Latin American scholars. For instance, Acuña
(2016) critically assesses the debate concerning the direction of the
explanation between Minkowski spacetime and the Lorentz invariance of
dynamical laws. Diego Maltrana also focuses on relativity from
different perspectives: in collaboration with Federico Benítez
and Pablo Razeto-Barry, he offers a new interpretation of the equation
“
E
=
mc
2
” by proposing that
mass, as a property, can be considered to emerge from energy
(Benítez, Maltrana, and Razeto-Barry 2022); in collaboration
with Manuel Herrera and Benítez, he generalizes the difference
between “framework” and “interaction”
theories, which in turn is based on Einstein’s distinction
between “principle” and “constructive”
theories (Maltrana, Herrera, and Benítez 2022); and in
collaboration with Nicolás Sepúlveda-Quiroz, he applies
that difference to general relativity (Maltrana,
Sepúlveda-Quiroz 2022).



The problem of time’s arrow was addressed by Castagnino,
Lombardi and collaborators by elaborating on John Earman’s
heresy (1974) according to which the arrow of time is a geometrical
property of the universe (Castagnino, Lombardi, and Lara 2003). This
global arrow is transferred to the local domain as an energy flow that
points to the same time direction on the entire spacetime (Castagnino
and Lombardi 2009), which in turn supplies the foundations for local
irreversible theories (Aiello, Castagnino, and Lombardi 2008).
Castagnino and Lombardi also collaborated with Manuel Gadella, one of
the authors of the time-asymmetric quantum mechanics, in order to
analyze irreversibility and time’s arrow in the quantum realm
(Castagnino, Gadella, and Lombardi 2006), a work recently followed by
Cristian López (2019). More recently, Cristian López
faces the problem of time reversal from a metaphysical perspective: he
claims that any account of time reversal presupposes modal,
metaphysical, and heuristic facets (López 2021a), argues that
the concept of time reversal may be understood differently depending
on one’s metaphysics about time, laws, and a theory’s
basic properties (López 2023a), and proposes a Humean
interpretation of time-reversal symmetry according to which it is an
epistemic virtue of the best system, not a property of the Humean
mosaic (López and Esfeld 2023). López has also analyzed
the concept of time reversal in the quantum case (López 2021b)
and considered the problem of the arrow of time in orthodox quantum
mechanics and in spontaneous collapse theories (López 2022a,
2022b).



Following the growing interest in symmetries in physics, some Latin
American authors have dealt with the subject. In the same line as his
works on time reversal, López (2023b) explores the
relationships between symmetries and metaphysics. Based on the
analysis of Noether’s theorems, Maltrana (2015) argues for the
priority of conserved quantities over symmetries. In turn, Aldo
Filomeno (2016) claims that any metaphysical account of fundamental
laws that expects symmetry restoration up to the fundamental level is
not fully satisfactory.


4.2 Philosophy of Chemistry



Although the philosophy of chemistry is a relatively young
subdiscipline in philosophy of science, it has attracted the interest
of several researchers in Latin America.



The group led by Olimpia Lombardi worked on the topic since 2005, when
a paper advocating for the ontological autonomy of chemistry (Lombardi
and Labarca 2005) was published. The paper sparked a hot debate which
began with a criticism by Paul Needham (2006) that was immediately
responded by Lombardi and Labarca (2006), and was followed by many
other authors. In the meantime, Labarca and Lombardi (2010) also
argued for the existence of orbitals in the ontology of chemistry,
relying on ontological pluralism. On the basis of the impact of her
view, Lombardi reviewed and organized the different criticisms and
offered a systematic response to them (2014a); in turn, with Mariana
Córdoba, she stressed the Kantian roots of her ontological
pluralism (Córdoba and Lombardi 2013).



Given her antireductionist perspective, Lombardi (2013, 2014b) also
criticized the book of Hinne Hettema (2012), 
Reducing Chemistry to
Physics
, stressing the many difficulties that must be faced by
those who insist on the reduction of chemistry to physics; the papers
received an immediate reply from Hettema (2014).



The problems regarding the relations between chemistry and physics
were addressed by Lombardi’s group from various perspectives. In
particular, they brought to light several interpretive issues of
quantum mechanics that lead to conceptual tensions when the theory is
used in chemistry (Lombardi and Castagnino 2010), pointed out the
difficulties in reducing molecular structure to quantum mechanics
(Martínez González, Fortin, and Lombardi 2019; Fortin
and Lombardi 2021), and argued that quantum decoherence does not solve
the problem of isomerism (Fortin, Lombardi, and Martínez
González 2016). Moreover, Juan Camilo Martínez
González (2020) considers the possibility of an ontology
specific to quantum chemistry and different from that of quantum
mechanics. The members of the group have also begun to face the issue
of the relationship between chemistry and quantum mechanics from other
theoretical perspectives, such as Bohmian mechanics (Fortin, Lombardi,
and Martínez González 2017; this last paper was
critically assessed by Giovanni Villani, Elena Ghibaudi, and Luigi
Cerruti 2018) and the Quantum Theory of Atoms in Molecules (QTAIM)
(Jaimes Arriaga, Fortin, and Lombardi 2019). In collaboration with
Chérif Matta, one of the world’s leading specialists in
QTAIM, they conceived the theory as a non-reductive bridge between
quantum mechanics and molecular chemistry (Matta, Lombardi, and
Arriaga 2020; Lombardi and Matta 2022).



As a continuation of her previous work in Spanish, Lombardi (2012)
offered a critical analysis of Ilya Prigogine’s proposals. In
turn, with Lucía Lewowicz, she analyzed the ontological
category of stuff as required by macro-chemistry (Lewowicz and
Lombardi 2013). The problem of the categories underlying the chemical
discourse was also addressed in the context of Lombardi’s group
by Mariana Córdoba and Alfio Zambon (2017) for the particular
case of nano-materials. These authors also considered the inter-theory
links involved in the relationships between nanochemistry, molecular
chemistry, and quantum mechanics (Córdoba and Zambon 2021).



A particular mention is deserved by Zambon’s (2018) completely
new representation of the periodic system based on atomic-number
triads, and its implications for science teaching and communication
(Zambon 2019). Zambon (2022) also proposes to replace the traditional
categories of cause and effect by that of interaction or reciprocal
action for the understanding of chemical reaction phenomena.



Guillermo Restrepo focused his interest on how formal tools can be
applied to chemistry. With José Luis Villaveces, he noted the
resemblance between Leibniz’s and Lavoisier’s programs
regarding a 
lingua philosophica
 for understanding nature
(Restrepo and Villaveces 2011) and reviewed the origins of
mathematical thinking in chemistry (Restrepo and Villaveces 2012).
Restrepo also analyzed the mathematical aspects of the periodic law
(Restrepo and Pachón 2007) and considered the different
foundational aspects of the field called “mathematical
chemistry” (2013; Restrepo and Villaveces 2013). Restrepo has
been working in Germany since 2014 where he still produces interesting
contributions to the philosophy of chemistry.



In the blurred boundaries between chemistry and biology, biochemistry
has been arousing some interest in Latin America during the last
decades. For instance, Pio García analyzes serendipity
discoveries in biochemistry, that is, those accidental findings made
when the discoverer is in quest for something else (García
2008), and argues that simulations were implicit in biochemistry in
the classical dichotomy in vivo-in vitro long before computers arrived
(García 2015). In turn, Gabriel Vallejo, together with two
non-Latin American colleagues, rejects the reductionist bias in the
conceptualization of the relationship between the composition,
structure and function of macromolecules like proteins, and argues
that it requires the analysis of the dynamical interplay between the
micro-level of parts and the macro-level of relational structures
(Santos, Vallejos, and Vecchi 2020). Karina Alleva and Lucía
Federico, together with the Spanish scholar José Díez,
argue that a model-theoretic notion of theory can be successfully
applied to the case of allosterism (Alleva, Díez, and Federico
2017). More recently, Fiorela Alassia (2023) adopted a
process-ontology perspective to understand the case of ligand
receptors and receptor-mediated biosignaling.



The development of the technological aspects of chemistry has been the
interest of José Antonio Chamizo (2013, 2017, 2019) with
applications to chemistry education.


4.3 Philosophy of Biology



The philosophy of biology in the region has been developed in various
directions, from the most traditional topics in the area to more
innovative questions.



The traditional topic of natural selection is treated in relation to
its explanatory power by Pablo Lorenzano in collaboration with the
Spanish philosopher José Díez (Díez and Lorenzano
2013, 2015). Mario Casanueva (2011) proposes a structuralist
reconstruction of the mechanism of natural selection by means of graph
resources, and Santiago Ginnobili (2016) offers a metatheoretical
structuralist reconstruction of Darwin’s theory with the purpose
of elucidating the concept of ecological fitness. Ginnobili also
approaches Darwinism by other perspectives: in collaboration with
Daniel Blanco, he compares Wallace’s and Darwin’s natural
selection theories (Ginnobili and Blanco 2019), he stresses that
Darwin confronted the idea of the objectivity of beauty (Ginnobili
2023a), and he analyzes how Darwin explained the origin of races
(Ginnobili 2023b) and modified previous functional biology (2022). In
turn, Gustavo Caponi (2013, in Spanish) studies the concepts of
function, fitness and adaptation in natural selection theory, and
explores how, with Darwin, the influence of living environment began
to be regarded as decisive for understanding the distribution,
configuration, and viability of living beings (Caponi 2022).



Closely related to natural selection, the issue of evolution is
approached from very different perspectives. For instance, Guillermo
Folguera stresses the dependence of macroevolution on microevolution
even in the criticisms of the synthesis since the seventies (Folguera
and Lombardi 2012), Maurizio Esposito (2011) supplies examples of how
Darwinism was used and adapted in different contexts, and Francisco
Vergara Silva, in collaboration with two non-Latin American scholars,
asks to what extent the extended evolutionary synthesis expands the
explanatory power of traditional evolutionary theory (Baedke,
Fabregas‑Tejeda, and Vergara‑Silva 2020). The evolutionary
process is also analyzed by Ariel Roffé from different
perspectives: he considers drift as a constitutive factor of evolution
(Roffé 2019), he claims that a propensity account of fitness
solves the classical tautologicity issue (Roffé and Ginnobili
2019), and he argues that cladistic practice within the dynamic
framework presupposes the distinction between primary and secondary
homology (Roffé 2020). In turn, Sergio Martínez (2019)
argues for a sort of continuity from biology to social sciences,
according to which recent accounts of innovation in biology can be
extended to account for cultural innovation.



However, the most extensive work on this issue has been developed by
Edna Suárez-Díaz who focused specifically on molecular
evolution. In this field, she studied the role played by the concept
of informational molecule and by the idea of molecular evolution of
informational molecules in differentiating molecular from classical
evolutionists and in the constitution of genomics
(Suárez-Díaz 2009, 2010). Despite stressing the
importance of the molecular experimental approach in evolutionary
biology (Suárez-Díaz and Barahona 1996;
Suárez-Díaz 2001), Suárez-Díaz
acknowledges the methodological and conceptual difficulties embedded
in the use of molecular evidence to elaborate molecular phylogenies
(Suárez-Díaz and Anaya-Muñoz 2008;
Suárez-Díaz 2014a), and emphasizes the generative nature
of experimentation (Suárez-Díaz 2013). In her recent
work, she points out that lateral gene transfer poses epistemic and
empirical challenges to the traditional reconstructions of
contemporary molecular phylogenetics (Estrada,
Suárez-Díaz, and Becerra 2022).



Heredity, always linked with biological knowledge, has been the topic
of interest of Carlos López-Beltrán who shows the
transformation of the concept from playing a metaphorical role to
acquiring a narrative role (1994) and subsequently being conceived in
statistical terms (2006). More recently, López-Beltrán
has been concerned with genomics in relation to the concept of race.
In this field he has edited, with other researchers, a volume on race
mixture in Latin America (Wade, López-Beltrán, Restrepo,
and Ventura Santos 2014) and a special issue of the journal 
Social
Studies of Science
 (see the introduction in Wade,
López-Beltrán, Restrepo, and Ventura Santos 2015).



By relating heredity with genetics, Esposito (2017) emphasizes the
longstanding relationships between the reductionist view of gene as
hereditary unit, the idea of information encoded in DNA, and the
prophecies about the power of controlling genetic information. From a
structuralist perspective, Lorenzano offers a metatheoretical
reconstruction of classical genetics (Balzer and Lorenzano 2000),
paying special attention to the Hardy-Weinberg’s law within
population genetics (2014), and accounts for scientific explanation as
ampliative, specialized nomological embedding in the case of classical
genetics making use of Sneedian structuralism (Lorenzano an
Díez 2022). Mario Casanueva (1997) explores the relationship
among the sexual theory of reproduction, Mendelian genetics, and
Mendel’s hybridization theory. In turn, Juan Manuel Torres
(1997, 2002, 2006) focuses on the use of genetic tests in medical
practice, and Ana Barahona (2007) considers how different inheritance
issues can be represented by genetic maps. More recently and with
several collaborators, Jose Alonso-Pavón and Barahona offer a
detailed map of genetics in México (Alonso-Pavón et al.
2001).



Siobhan (formerly Fabrizzio) Guerrero Mc Manus examines some
methodological problems in biology: the rational selection of an
algorithm for phylogenetic inference (2009) and the limitations of
mechanistic explanations when dealing with developmental mechanisms
(2012). More recently, she has considered whether paleoanthropology is
merely a biological science or it requires attending to social,
cultural, and political issues (Mc Manus 2018). In turn, the issue of
causation is treated by Maximiliano Martínez in terms of the
concept of multi-level causation (Martínez and Moya 2011;
Martínez and Esposito 2014). The ideas of a multiplicity of
levels and of downward causation appear repeatedly in the works of
Charbel El-Hani (El-Hani and Pereira 1999; El-Hani and Emmeche 2000;
Queiroz and El-Hani 2006), with the purpose of advocating for property
and process emergence in biology. In his recent works, El-Hani has
focused on ethnobiology in order to contribute to developing a
“philosophy of ethnobiology” as an interdisciplinary field
devoted to exploring foundational issues in ethnobiology and expanding
the agenda of the philosophy of biology (Ludwig and El-Hani 2020, see
also Nieves Delgado, Ludwig, and El-Hani 2023), and has analyzed the
concept of “ecosystem health” and compares it with the
notions of health and malfunction in organisms (Sfara and El-Hani
2023).



In collaboration with El-Hani, João Queiroz has developed
extensive work on the biosemiotic approach to biology (El-Hani,
Queiroz, and Stjernfelt 2010; Queiroz, Emmeche, Kull, and El-Hani
2011; Queiroz 2012; Queiroz, Stjernfelt, and El-Hani 2014), and its
relationship with genetic information (El-Hani, Queiroz, and Emmeche
2006). From a completely different viewpoint,
Suárez-Díaz (2007) discusses what she considers the
metaphor of information in molecular biology.



Other non-classical but currently very relevant topics in life
sciences are also treated in the region, such as environmental matters
(Klier et al. 2017), ecology (Nunes-Neto, Moreno, and El-Hani 2014),
and evo-devo (Baedke and Mc Manus 2018).



Finally, it is worth mentioning a recent trend that, in the confluence
among philosophy, anthropology, and biology, considers political
issues in biological research (Wade et al. 2014; García-Deister
and López-Beltrán 2015; Delgado 2018), studies genomic
variations in Latin America (Suárez-Díaz 2014b;
Anaya-Muñoz, García-Deister, and
Suárez-Díaz 2017), examines the relationship among
genetic research, nationalism, and the construction of collective
social identities (Kent et al. 2015), and explores the relationships
among homosexuality, homophobia, and biomedical sciences in the region
(Mc Manus 2014). In this context, Vivette García-Deister has
focused on the subtle relations between genetics and politics in Latin
America, by showing the dependence of diabetes not on genetics but on
socioeconomics (García-Deister and López-Beltrán
2015), by exploring the idea of national or regional genomic identity
(Vasques and García-Deister 2019), and by examining the
relationship between forensic genetics, Indigenous organization, and
human rights practice (Smith and García-Deister 2021). She also
considers the different ways in which engineering concepts and methods
have been applied in biology (Knuuttila and García Deister
2019) and analyzes the movement of living migrants’ bodies and
dead bodies as scientific objects and sociopolitical signposts for
sovereignty and identity (García-Deister and Smith 2020).



Before closing this section, two sources of further information should
be noted. First, the book edited by Lorenzo Baravalle and Luciana
Zaterka (2020), which presents to English speaking readers a good
sample of research in the field of history and philosophy of biology
developed in Latin America. Second, the entry “Philosophy of
Biology in Latin America” (Lorenzano 2023b), which contains
information on the extensive material on the philosophy and the
history of biology in Spanish, as well as on studies on biological
issues in Latin American countries produced by foreign authors. .


4.4 Philosophy of Formal Sciences



Sometimes very close to logic itself, the philosophy of logic has an
important presence in Latin American philosophy of science from
multiple perspectives.



The logical treatment of contradiction attracted great interest,
mainly in the groups of Campinas and Buenos Aires, although with
different motivations. In Campinas, where one underlying interest was
the possibility of modeling contradictory information in scientific
practice, Newton da Costa focused on the mathematical concept of
“pragmatic truth” (Mikenberg, da Costa, and Chuaqui 1986)
with the purpose of showing that the logic of pragmatic truth is
paraconsistent (da Costa, Bueno, and French 1998). He also worked with
Décio Krause in the application of paraconsistent logics to
physics (da Costa and Krause 2014, 2016). In turn, Walter Carnielli
and Marcelo Coniglio developed an approach in which the distinction
between logic and philosophy is not straightforward. On the
philosophical side, and following the path opened by da Costa, they
focused on the so-called “logics of formal inconsistency”,
a family of paraconsistent logics that can express the notion of
consistency within the object language (Carnielli, Coniglio, and
Marcos 2007). Carnielli also developed dialogical and epistemic
approaches to paraconsistency (Rahman and Carnielli 2000; Carnielli
and Rodrigues 2019). It is worth noting a book on contradiction and
inconsistency, compiled by Carnielli and the Polish logician Jacek
Malinowski (2018), which gathers contributions from various Latin
American authors.



In the group led by Eduardo Barrio at Buenos Aires, works on
inconsistency were motivated by semantic reasons, in particular, the
treatment of paradoxes (Barrio 2010; Picollo 2012; Barrio and Picollo
2012; Rosenblatt and Gallovich 2022; Rosenblatt 2023). The members of
the group study non-transitivity as a solution of the paradox problem
(Barrio, Rosenblatt, and Tajer 2015), and considered substructural
approaches to paradoxes (Da Ré and Rosenblatt 2018; Barrio,
Rosenblatt, and Tajer 2021; Rosenblatt 2021a; see also the special
issue of 
Journal of Philosophical Logic
 on substructural
logics and metainferences edited by Eduardo Barrio and Paul Egre
2022). They also propose and defend a new way of characterizing a
logic, that helps distinguishing the non-transitive logic ST from the
classical logic CL (Barrio, Pailos, and Szmuc 2020a). Some members of
the group were also interested in “non-classical logic and
classical recapture”, in the contexts of paraconsistent logic
(Teijeiro 2018, 2020a) and of logics of formal inconsistency (Tajer
2018, 2020); in particular, Lucas Rosenblatt analyzes the very concept
of classical recapture and faces the objections received by this
strategy from different perspectives (Rosenblatt 2021b, 2022; Fiore
and Rosenblatt 2023). Recently, Barrio and collaborators have begun to
focus specifically on paraconsistency in its different aspects
(Barrio, Pailos, and Szmuc 2017, 2018a, 2020b; Barrio and Da Ré
2018; Barrio, Clerbout, and Rahman 2020), and Paula Teijeiro (2020b,
2022) has directed her attention to certain non-traditional logical
connectives.



The strong contact between the groups of Campinas and Buenos Aires
resulted in the publication of two special issues of the 
Logic
Journal of the IGPL
 (Barrio and Carnielli 2020a, 2020b) devoted
to logics of formal inconsistency. The interest in paradoxes and
inconsistency also appeared in other authors of the region, such as
Andrés Bobenrieth (1998).



Topics related to non-extensionality, in particular modal logics and
Kripkean semantics, were also treated by some philosophers of logic in
Latin America (e.g., Mortari 2007; Marcos 2009;
Estrada-González 2013; Rosenblatt and Szmuc 2014). In
particular, Max Freund (2001, 2004, 2007, 2015) focused on modal
logics with sortal quantifiers and wrote a collaborative book on modal
logic (Cocchiarella and Freund 2008).



The question of the coexistence of different logics was additionally
addressed by the groups in Buenos Aires and Campinas. Whereas Barrio
and collaborators discussed logical pluralism (Barrio, Pailos, and
Szmuc 2018b), Carnielli and Coniglio focused on the problems of
translations between logics (Carnielli, Coniglio, and
D’Ottaviano 2009) and combinations of logics (Carnielli and
Coniglio 2007 [2016]). In México, Luis Estrada-González
analyzed different aspects of contra-classical systems, which are
neither subsystems nor extensions of classical logic
(Estrada-González and Tanús-Pimentel 2021;
Estrada-González 2023).



More traditional problems related with the philosophy of logic have
also been treated by the philosophers of logic of the region; for
instance, the problem of truth (e.g. Barrio and
Rodríguez-Pereyra 2015; Barrio and Da Ré 2017) and the
meaning of connectives (Estrada-González 2011, 2017). In
particular, Mario Gómez-Torrente (1998, 2000, 2002, 2008, 2009,
2014) developed a longstanding work on the notion of logical truth,
truth preservation and the relationships among logical truth,
derivability and model-theoretic validity. More recently, he discusses
the notion of adequate formalization (Gómez-Torrente 2020) and
reviews the problem of logical constants (Gómez-Torrente
2021).



In the group of Florianopolis, emerged under the influence of Newton
da Costa, Jonas Becker Arenhart analyzes the epistemic approach to
paraconsistency (Arenhart 2021) and discusses the idea of interpreting
paraconsistency (Arenhart 2022a). Following ideas of da Costa, he also
argues for the use of hypothetical models in logic (Arenhart 2022b)
and advocates for logical anti-exceptionalism, that is, the view that
logic is not special, but it is continuous with empirical science (da
Costa and Arenhart 2018; Arenhart 2022c). In turn, Arenhart and Krause
(2023) critically examine the concept of quasi truth in its
application to science.



Although in the boundaries between logic and epistemology, the logic
of belief revision and the works of Carlos Alchourrón
(Alchourrón and Makinson 1981, 1982; Alchourrón 1996)
cannot be forgotten: the AGM model (Alchourrón,
Gärdenfors, and Makinson 1985) is still the dominant theory of
belief revision (see entry
 
logic of belief revision

 in this Encyclopedia). Andrés Páez (2006) uses the
theory of belief revision to supply a concept of explanation embodied
with pragmatic conditions. Closely related with this topic,
“defeasible reasoning” was extensively studied by Gustavo
Bodanza and Fernando Tohmé (2005, 2009; Bodanza, Tohmé,
and Simari 2016; Bodanza, Tohmé, and Auday 2017; see also
Bodanza 2002; Bodanza and Alessio 2017). More recently, Bodanza (2023)
developed a graph-theoretical tools to find properties that can be
applied both to the analysis of semantic paradoxes and to the
semantics of abstract defeasible argumentation, and proposes a
tableaux method that enables to calculate whether arguments are
accepted or rejected in accordance with the most common extension
semantics for argumentation frameworks (Bodanza and
Hernández-Manfredini 2023).



Tohmé also supplied a category-theoretic representation of
abduction (Tohmé, Caterina, and Gangle 2015), and analyzed
abduction in its application to economy (Crespo, Tohmé, and
Heymann 2010; Tohmé and Crespo 2013; Thomé 2022).
Abductive reasoning was also the main interest of Atocha Aliseda
(2003; Aliseda, Soler, and Nepomuceno 2009, 2023), who applied
abduction to medical diagnosis (Aliseda and Leonides 2013), proposed a
conditional logic to formalize abduction (Beirlaen and Aliseda 2014),
and argued for new tools to improve the logical approach to philosophy
of science (Aliseda 2022). She also published a book completely
devoted to abduction (Aliseda 2006), which not only discusses
conceptual and formal matters, but also pays special attention to the
epistemic applications of abductive reasoning.



In the boundaries between logics and philosophy of science,
María del Rosario Martínez-Ordaz (2021, 2022a) considers
inconsistency toleration in sciences and the application of
paraconsistent logics in those cases.



In the field of the philosophy of mathematics, Alfonso Ávila
(2006) has discussed in what sense the philosophy of mathematics is
different from mathematics and metamathematics, and
Gómez-Torrente (2015) has drawn conclusions about the essence
and identity of natural numbers. In turn, Eduardo N. Giovannini has
focused on the foundations of geometry (Giovannini 2016; Giovannini et
al. 2022) and has analyzed implicit definitions (Giovannini and
Schiemer 2019). Form a completely different perspective, Ulianov
Montaño (2014) proposes a naturalistic aesthetic theory that
accounts for aesthetic phenomena in mathematics.


4.5 Philosophy of Cognitive Sciences



The philosophy of cognitive sciences is a very complex field, mainly
due to the difficulty to distinguish it from other areas such as
philosophy of mind, epistemology, linguistics, philosophy of action,
and logic.



The traditional topic of consciousness has been treated in its
relationship to brain functions from a naturalized perspective by
José Luis Díaz (1995, 2000) and more recently by Miguel
Angel Sebastián (2014) on the basis of the neurophysiology of
dreams. In turn, Beatriz Sorrentino Marques and Osvaldo Pessoa (2017)
consider the role of consciousness in agent causation theories.



Another traditional topic, perception, is addressed by Juan Carlos
González, who analyzes the process of perceptual recalibration
(González, Bach-y-Rita, and Haase 2005) and the case of
hallucinations (González 2010, 2016), and by Laura Danón
and Daniel Kalpokas (2017), who offer an explanation of the direct
perception of mental states of others. The problem of perception
continued to be Kalpokas’s interest during the last years from a
propositional view of perception (2020a, 2020b, 2022a); in particular,
he argues that Brandom passes over a conception of perceptual
experience as a sort of contentful mental state (2019, 2022b).



Juan Pablo Bermúdez focuses on mental actions, supplying an
account of skillful action that rejects both intellectualism and
anti-intellectualism (2017) and claiming that remembering is not
merely passive but must be viewed as a mental action and that even
mind-wandering can be intentional (Arango-Muñoz and
Bermúdez 2018, 2021). More recently, Bermúdez has
directed his attention to self-control, arguing that willpower
requires tactical skill, which detects willpower-demanding contexts,
selects context-appropriate tactics, and monitors their implementation
(Bermúdez 2021a, 2021b; Bermúdez et al. 2021), and he
has analyzed the difference between effort and the feeling of effort
(Bermúdez and Massin 2023).



In collaboration with Bermúdez, Alejandro Rosas stresses the
cognitive and non-cognitive roots of shared intentionality (Rosas and
Bermúdez 2018) and the influence of cognitive dispositions on
weakness of will attribution (Rosas, Bermúdez, and
Gutiérrez 2018). In addition to his collaborative work with
Bermúdez, Rosas developed an extensive work on the evolution of
moral cognition and the cognitive roots of cooperation (2002, 2008a,
2021). In particular, he claims that altruism is selected both at the
individual and at the group levels (2008b) and proposes a unified
theory of human cooperation based on reciprocity (2010, 2012). In
turn, with colleagues coming from philosophy and from science, he has
contributed to the research on moral judgment with moral dilemmas
(Rosas and Koenigs 2014; Rosas, Viciana, Caviedes, and Arciniegas
2019).



The phenomenon of abstraction has been considered by Sergio
Martínez from different perspectives: he claims that the
epistemic grounding of abstraction is related to the constraints on
the cognitive processes of specific abstractions (Martínez and
Huang 2011) and argues for the importance of the notions of
“affordance” and “scaffolding” as concepts
leading to the integration of different concepts into the right
abstraction (Estany and Martínez 2014).



The problem of mistakes or slips, has captured the attention of
Santiago Amaya, who argues that the analysis of those common mistakes
illuminates aspects of human agency that tend to be overlooked when
the emphasis is placed on rationality (Amaya 2013, 2015; Amaya and
Doris 2015). More recently, he has focused on habits, arguing that
habits, just like beliefs, can guide intentional action (Amaya 2021).




An approach that has received much attention in the region is that of
embodied cognition and, particularly, enactivism (see González
2013; Hutto and Satne 2017; Martínez, Español, and
Pérez 2018). For instance, Ignacio Avila analyzes bodily
awareness and its role in perceptual self-location (2014, 2017) and
considers certain enactive accounts of perception (2015). Adrian
Cussins (2012) discusses the role that the representation of the body
plays in cognition. In turn, Maria Eunice Quilici González asks
whether embodied cognition can be applied to artificial systems as
robots (Haselager and González 2007a).



Axel Barceló Aspeitia and Angeles Eraña focused their
work mainly on the modularity of mind in order to adapt the idea of
domain specificity (Barceló, Eraña, and Stainton 2010)
and to compare the hypothesis of massive modularity to other views
about the structure of mind (Eraña 2012). In this context,
Claudia Lorena García (2007) argues that the hypothesis of the
modularity of mind needs to be understood in terms of the evolutionary
biological concepts of variational independence (2007) and of
functional homology and functional variation (2010). More recently,
García proposes to categorize mental disorders as clusters of
interrelated disfunctions of cognitive capacities
(Salcedo-Gómez and García 2023).



Metacognition is the topic that attracted the interest of Santiago
Arango-Muñoz, who distinguishes between the rationalizing level
and the controlling level in metacognition (2011) and appeals to the
concepts of metamemory and metacognitive feelings to address the
interactions between the mind and the world (2013). Furthermore, he
explores the nature of the so-called “epistemic feelings”
from a metacognitive perspective (2014, 2019).



Cognitive functions are approached from an informational perspective
by M.E.Q. González, who analyzes mechanical models of
intelligence (2005) and of reasoning (González, Broens, and
D’Ottaviano 2007; Haselager and González 2007b). From the
same informational approach, Sebastián and Marc Artiga (2020)
explore metarepresentation. Other formal perspectives are adopted to
verify the so-called cognitive task analysis (Laureano-Cruces and
Barceló-Aspeitia 2002) and to analyze the agent’s
resolution of conditional probability problems (Moro, Bodanza, and
Freidin 2011). In turn, Mariela Aguilera stresses the relevance of
pictorial and cartographical representation in cognition to express
normative contents (2019) and focuses on the inferential relations
between cartographic and linguistic representations (2021).



From a completely different viewpoint, several authors in the region
prefer to understand cognitive phenomena in an analytical framework,
specifically in relation to language (e.g., Skidelsky 2013;
García-Ramírez 2011; García-Ramírez and
Shatz 2011), with affinity with research in philosophy of mind.



The problem of attributing psychological states to non-human animals
is an issue that has sparked the interest of some researchers (see,
e.g., Crelier 2022). Laura Danón has paid great attention to
this topic, considering the possibility of intentionality (2019a),
normativity (2019b), propositional content (2022a), and conceptual
recombination (2022b) in non-human animals’ minds.


4.6 Philosophy of Social Sciences



Certain methodological problems of social sciences have been addressed
by Diego Ríos, who analyzed social explanation with mechanistic
and evolutionary models (2004; Kuchle and Ríos 2015, 2022), and
studied the relationship between methodological individualism and
methodological holism (Ríos 2005, 2009; Ríos Pozzi
2007). Nevertheless, almost all of the philosophy of social sciences
in Latin America has been directed to theoretical issues in specific
sciences or particular problems of the region.



With regard to the philosophy of economics, the foundations of the
theory of value have been studied (García de la Sienra 1988,
1989) and the autonomy and irreducibility of economics has been
discussed (Scarano 2012; Gómez 2012). More recently,
José Carlos Ramírez Sánchez and Adolfo
García de la Sienra (2020) analyze the impact of the dynamic
systems techniques on the recent development of neoclassical
economics.



A field that attracts great interest is the philosophy of history.
Elías Palti recalls the evolution and crisis of the area
(2018), and distinguishes the so-called “politico-intellectual
history” from the old “history of political ideas”
(2010, 2014). More recently, Palti (2021) analyzes Deleuze’s
interpretation of Foucault’s idea of knowledge/power. Veronica
Tozzi (2012a, 2016, 2018), in turn, proposes an original pragmatist
approach to the philosophy of history, which appeals to Dewey’s
notion of “practical meaning” in relation to the knowledge
of the past. Tozzi also focuses on the problem of the roles that
memory and testimony play in representing the recent past (2009,
2012b). In connection to these concepts, Esteban Lythgoe (2011, 2014)
analyzes how Paul Ricoeur articulates history, memory, and
testimony.



Issues related to narrativism in history have also been studied. In
particular, Tozzi (2021, 2023) considers the epistemic value of
narrative explanation, and María Inés La Greca (2021)
finds a meaningful intersection between theory of history, gender
studies and narrativism. In turn, Natalia Taccetta (2021) explores
some artistic devices, in particular two films, which defy
history-writing conventions.



Other topics involved in the philosophy of history have also been
considered: the historicity of the concept of subject (Palti 2004),
the ideas of progress (Ratto 2018), and of future (Belvedresi 2018).
Rosa Belvedresi (2019) also analyzes the concept of empathy in its
role in the epistemology of history. María Inés
Mudrovcic highlights the different types of consciousness of
temporality (2014, 2019) and analyzes the political self-understanding
of the present in terms of the past in contemporary Western societies
(2013). The impact of the phenomenon of globalization on
historiographical paradigms (Brauer 2018) and on the deformation of
ethical and political concepts (Roldán 2018) are also examined.
In turn, the idea of Global History is considered by Belvedresi
(2012), who compares it with the concept of universal history, and by
Francisco Naishtat (2012) as a framework for the Marxist debate on
colonialism and modernization.



At the crossroads between philosophy of politics and political
philosophy—if there is any difference between them—the
categories of equality and liberty (Hilb 1994), authority
(Oyarzún 2012), identity politics (Pérez 2023), and
power (Oyarzún 2017) have been analyzed. In this field,
Naishtat has developed extensive research aimed mainly at critically
evaluating phenomena on a global scale. For instance, he analyzes the
relationship between fragile sovereignties, global-intensive
governance apparatuses, and a horizon-less catastrophe-world (2010a),
and argues that the political dimension of the global is global
justice (2011). In turn, Naishtat stands in the context of recent
political events when he considers the possibility of peace and rights
transcending state frontiers in the light of the 1990s 
Balkan

wars (2000) and the displacement of the content of the terms
“terror” and “terrorism” after 9/11 towards a
meaning functional to globalization (2010b). More recently, he
explored the phenomenon of globalization from the perspective of the
controversy about the concept of time between Benjamin and Heidegger
(Naishtat 2018).



Latin American themes are recurrent in the philosophy of social
sciences of the region. Palti has been very active in this field: he
studied the nineteenth century Latin American intellectual history in
the context of the thesis of the essential contestability of concepts
(2005), considered the limitations of the notion of “misplaced
ideas” by means of which Roberto Schwarz analyzed the dynamics
of ideas in Latin America (2006), and critically examined the radical
transformation in the ways of conceiving the process leading to the
break of colonial ties that linked Latin America with Spain (2009).
Other authors share this interest in regional problems, such as Pablo
Oyarzún (2007), who focused on Latin American singularities,
Gustavo Leyva (2014), who considered how the democratic project was
reformulated and radicalized in Latin America over the last decades,
and Ambrosio Velasco Gómez (2015b), who proposes an original
thesis about the intellectual roots of Mexican independence.



When Latin American themes are considered, the so-called Philosophy of
Liberation cannot be forgotten: a philosophical movement that emerged
in the late sixties in Argentina and spread through Latin America in
the following decades with authors such as Enrique Dussel, Leopoldo
Zea, Arturo Roig, Francisco Miró Quesada, and Carlos Cullen,
among many others. Nevertheless, here the topic will not be treated
because a complete entry of the Encyclopedia is devoted to it (Eduardo
Mendieta,
 
philosophy of liberation
).


4.7 Philosophy of Technology



The philosophy of technology has attracted significant interest of
Latin American researchers working from very different perspectives,
whether ontological-epistemological or ethical-political. From a
general viewpoint, Ricardo Gómez (2010) offers a detailed
overview of the philosophical ideas about technology.



Regarding the ontological status of technical artifacts and actions,
Diego Lawler critically analyzes the functional and intentional
theories about the nature of artifact kinks (Vega and Lawler 2014) and
proposes a praxeological approach to technological practices (Lawler
2018). In turn, Andrés Vaccari directs criticisms to the
functionalist assumptions underlying the dual nature of technical
artifacts program (2013) and the extended cognition theory applied to
artifacts (2017), claiming that transhumanism has failed in its aim to
ground the transformation of the human condition on technology (2015).
In this context, Jorge Linares Salgado (2019, in Spanish) critically
analyzes the bioartifactual revolution that aims to biotechnically
reconfigure living organisms, emphasizing the ethical-philosophical
questions it raises. In turn, Sergio Martínez (2013) claims
that models of cultural evolution can be understood as modeling
cognitive processes embodied in the evolution of artifacts.



More recently, Lawler and Vaccari have collaborated with other authors
to argue for an enactive conception of productive practices (Sandrone,
Vaccari, and Lawler 2022) and to point out the centrality of the
machine in the thought of Jacques Lafitte (Di Paolo, Lawler, and
Vaccari 2023). In turn, Vaccari (2020, 2022) has focused on the
concept of cosmotechnics, understood as the unification between the
cosmic order and the moral order through technical activities.



The ontological status of artificial agents and artificial life was
addressed by Maria González and Osvaldo Pessoa (2008), who face
the problem of whether life and autonomy could in principle be
sustained with components other than carbon, and by Diego Parente
(2018), who considers the challenges that these cases pose to the
traditional dichotomy between natural/artificial. With regard to this
issue, Karina Pedace and coauthors (Pedace et al. 2019) argue that
humans are naturally transhuman and, so, urge to wake up from the
transhumanist dream. Pablo Rodríguez and Javier Blanco (2017),
in turn, confront Gilbert Simondon’s theory of individuation
with ideas coming from cybernetics.



From an epistemological perspective, Myriam Altamirano Bustamante,
Adalberto de Hoyos, and León Olivé (2011) state that
much of the tacit knowledge involved in technology can be transmitted
as explicit knowledge through patents.



The ethical and socio-political dimensions of technology are topics
that have received great attention in the region. For instance, Jorge
Linares Salgado (2018) analyzes the ethical and societal consequences
of the production of bio-artifacts derived from synthetic biology. A
more specific study is offered by Carlos Osorio Marulanda (2018), who
addresses the problems related with drinking water production,
especially in rural areas of Latin America, from the perspective of
science, technology, and society (STS) studies.



In the area of STS studies, the extensive work of Hebe Vessuri
occupies a relevant place. In the boundaries between sociology and
philosophy, Vessuri has addressed general problems from a regional
point of view. For example, she considers how the current admission of
the underlying ontological complexity of the world influences both the
socio-cognitive and the institutional organization of disciplinary
knowledge, especially in developing countries (2000), and how science
and technology can respond to the particular needs of Latin American
societies (2003). Vessuri also discusses the world distribution of
scientists, engineers, and technologists and the movement of these
personnel from peripheral countries to central countries (de la Vega
and Vessuri 2008). More recently, Vessuri has been interested in the
problem of sustainability (Mercado, Córdova, and Vessuri 2022)
and in the peculiarities of knowledge production in Latin America
(Vessuri 2019; Vessuri and Rodríguez-Medina 2022). The readers
interested in STS studies in Latin America can turn to the article
“Latin American science, technology, and society. A historical
and reflexive approach” (Kreimer and Vessuri 2018), which
describes the development of STS in the region, its
institutionalization, and its spaces of interaction.



Two themes that are very present in contemporary society, artificial
intelligence and big data, have also appeared in the philosophical
reflection of the region. Andrés Páez critically
examines the notion of explanation used in AI in general, and in the
theory of belief revision in particular (2009), and argues that the
search for explainable models and interpretable decisions in AI must
be reformulated in the broader context of a naturalistic account of
understanding in AI (2019). In turn, María del Rosario
Martínez-Ordaz addresses the question of whether there is
anything special about the ignorance involved in big data practices
(2022b), and argues that scientists can achieve some understanding of
both the products of big data implementation as well as of the target
phenomenon to which they are expected to refer (2023).



Finally, two books in Spanish by León Olivé must be
recalled due to their impact in the Latin American community of
philosophers of science: whereas in the first (Olivé 2000)
science and technology are considered on a par, the second book
(Olivé 2007) deals specifically with the different facets of
technology. More recently, a book has been published, containig much
of the contemporary work on the philosophy of technology from the
Portuguese-Speaking Community. The book includes four collaborations
of Brazilian researchers: Ivan Domingues (2023), whose purpose is to
extend the current paradigms in the philosophy of technology, Alberto
Cupani (2023), who analyzes the difference between scientific and
technological knowledge, Renato Dagnino (2023), who proposes the
concept of solidary technoscience, which is particularly relevant for
Latin American countries, and Hugh Lacey and Pablo Mariconda (2023),
who criticize the predominance of commercially oriented technoscience
and advocate for a new model for the interaction between technological
activities and values. In turn, María Antonia González
Valerio, in collaboration with the Slovenian author Polona Tratnik,
published a book devoted to biotechnological art from a philosophical
viewpoint (González Valerio and Tratnik 2023).


4.8 Other Topics



Other topics, not easily included in the traditional philosophies of
particular sciences, have also been addressed in Latin America.



What is now known as philosophy of information has been an interest of
Olimpia Lombardi and her research group from different perspectives.
The meaning of the term “information” is elucidated from a
general viewpoint (Lombardi 2004), paying particular attention to
Shannon information (Lombardi 2005; Lombardi, Holik, and Vanni 2016a),
and arguing for a pluralistic interpretation of the concept (Lombardi,
Fortin, and Vanni 2015). By adopting a critical perspective regarding
Christopher Timpson’s deflationary view of information
(Lombardi, Fortin, and López 2016), it is argued that there is
no qualitative difference between Shannon and quantum information
besides the difference in the way in which they are encoded (Lombardi,
Holik, and Vanni 2016b). In turn, an interpretational account of
quantum measurement is offered (Lombardi, Fortin, and López
2015). On the basis of this critical work, Lombardi and Cristian
López (2018) have elucidated the concept of information as used
in Giulio Tononi’s Integrated Information Theory of
Consciousness, and have proposed a manipulation-based interpretation
of communicational information (López and Lombardi 2019).



The philosophy of science as a resource for science education is a
topic that has acquired an increasing interest in Latin America during
the last decades. In this field, two authors have developed intensive
work. Agustín Adúriz-Bravo addressed the use of
well-known episodes from the history of science, such as the
formulation of the pendulum law by Galileo (2004) and the discovery of
radium by the Curies (Adúriz-Bravo and Izquierdo-Aymerich 2009)
for science education. Moreover, he applied the cognitive model of
science (Izquierdo-Aymerich and Adúriz-Bravo 2003;
Adúriz-Bravo and Izquierdo-Aymerich 2005) and the semantic view
of scientific theories (Adúriz-Bravo 2011, 2013) both to the
practice of science teaching and to research on science education. He
also appealed to the so called “Nature of Science” view of
science for the education of science teachers (Adúriz-Bravo
2007, 2014) and to abduction for science education
(Adúriz-Bravo and Sans Pinillos 2022). On the basis of those
theoretical foundations, Adúriz-Bravo focuses on the philosophy
of chemistry as a resource for the didactics of chemistry (Erduran,
Adúriz-Bravo, and Mamlok Naaman 2007; Izquierdo-Aymerich and
Adúriz-Bravo 2009; Adúriz-Bravo, Merino, and
Izquierdo-Aymerich 2012; Sarıtaş, Özcan, and
Adúriz-Bravo 2021). Recently, he has expanded his network of
international collaborations to provide a framework for
epistemological discussion on integrated STEM education
(Ortiz-Revilla, Adúriz-Bravo, and Greca 2020), to study how
school scientific argumentation is enriched by digital technologies
(Romano, Occelli, and Adúriz-Bravo 2021), and to show how
narratives on epidemics can be used as tools for science teaching in
secondary schools (Revel Chion and Adúriz-Bravo 2022)



Much of the interest of Charbel El-Hani has been centered on the
philosophy of biology for the didactics of biology. He advocates for a
theory-centered approach to the concept of life (2008) and considers
the advantages of the dialogue between the students’
ethnobiological knowledge and biology school knowledge (Baptista and
El-Hani 2009). He also appeals to the works of Mendel and Darwin for
teaching genetics and evolution (Bizzo and El-Hani 2009; El-Hani 2015)
and analyzes the different concepts of gene that often overlap in
biology education (Dos Santos, Joaquim, and El-Hani 2012; Meyer,
Bomfim, and El-Hani 2013; Gericke, Hagberg, dos Santos, Joaquim, and
El-Hani 2014). More recently, he has discussed how the conceptual
content for biology high school curricula should be selected (de
Carvalho, El-Hani, and Nunes-Neto 2020) and proposes a model for
teaching the nature of science in the context of biological education
(Inêz, de Lacerda Brito, and El-Hani 2023). Beyond the specific
field of biology, El-Hani accounts for the different ways in which
individuals and societies represent concepts (Aguiar Jr, Sevian, and
El-Hani 2018), discusses how to deal with the relations between
different cultural perspectives in classrooms (Moreira-dos-Santos and
El-Hani 2017), and advocates for understanding as one of the major
goals of science education (Ferreira, El-Hani, and da Silva Filho
2016).


5. Concluding Remarks



After reviewing the development of philosophy of science in Latin
America since its emergence in the mid-twentieth century, it can be
said that there are some distinctive features in the different
countries. But in the last decades, especially given the widespread
use of the Internet and digital libraries by the mid-1990s, a growing
intercommunication and collaboration can be verified as well as the
tendency to form an academic community with an important international
presence, which, at the same time, has certain characteristics of its
own. Among the common features, the following deserve to be
mentioned.




In general, in Latin American countries the philosophy of science
began to be cultivated in the mid-twentieth century in those academic
circles that were favorable to analytic philosophy, understood in a
broad sense. The so-called “philosophical analysis”, more
than a school or doctrinal body, represented in Latin America an
alternative way of doing philosophy: in this trend, the methodological
demands of conceptual elucidation and argumentative rigor supported a
reaction against the metaphysical, speculative, or dogmatic traditions
that predominated in the 1940s. Thus, analytical philosophy favored
the focus on problems posed in the fields of logic, science, and
language (without restricting the analysis of the latter to ordinary
language). Based on this common root, since the 1960s philosophy of
science has acquired a place of its own in most countries of the
region.


Although the “Americanist” concern (understood as the
search for a philosophy of the region, with its own identity) did not
prevail in philosophy of science of Latin America, the constant and
growing exchange between Latin American philosophers of science has
had the result of generating lines of research that integrate the
concerns for the social problems afflicting the countries of the
region and the role that science and technology can play in its
solution. Thus, from the 1990s, a triple movement was generated:
orientation towards practical issues, openness to other philosophical
traditions—different from the analytic tradition—, and a
direct connection between the main Latin American nuclei where
philosophy of science is developed.


At the turn of the century, a vigorous growth of the philosophy of
particular sciences can be observed, especially the philosophy of
physics and biology, and more recently the philosophy of cognitive
sciences. The philosophy of chemistry—a field that had been
ignored all over the world until 1980—has only recently begun to
be cultivated in countries such as Argentina and Mexico. In contrast,
in philosophy of the social sciences, Latin America shows an unequal
growth compared to the philosophy of the natural sciences. Despite
this, it can be said that a sustained effort is being made to promote
areas such as the philosophy of psychology, sociology, and economics.
Furthermore, the philosophy of formal sciences has advanced
significantly.


Regarding the philosophy of technology, it received very little
attention until the end of the last century. However, the frequent
interaction with the Spanish philosophers of technology, through their
participation in specialized meetings and their collaboration in
graduate programs, has favored the cultivation of this research axis
in close connection with the critical reflection on the relationships
between technology and the economic, social, and environmental
problems afflicting the region.


Regarding general philosophy of science, its development shows a
remarkable diversification in Latin America. In a relatively short
period of time—which started in the late 1980s—there has
been a growing expansion of problems, approaches, and lines of
research. Even the discussion of great classical problems, such as
rationality and realism, is carried out from alternative perspectives,
many of which have recovered the naturalist approach of classical
pragmatists, which in the 1960s gained a new impetus under the
so-called “Historicist turn”. On the other hand, this
strong tendency to develop a naturalized philosophy of science has
been accompanied by the defense of markedly pluralist positions, both
in the methodological as well as the epistemological and ontological
fields. All of this points to a conception of philosophical work that,
without neglecting argumentative rigor and conceptual elucidation,
deals with and worries about the problems of its context and
historical moment. In the philosophy of science, this has been
reflected in a growing awareness of the need to rethink the
relationships among science, technology, and society, along with its
ethical, political, economic, environmental, and gender
dimensions.


One aspect worth emphasizing is the gender distribution of
researchers in the region. While the philosophy of science in Latin
America was originally exclusively masculine, the situation began to
change slowly but steadily since the last decade of the past century.
As the years of publication progress, a greater presence of women in
the production of the area is observed. Although we are still far from
an equitable representation in terms of gender, the trend allows us to
expect that in the near future women and other gender identities will
have a much greater participation in the production of philosophy of
science in the region.


By way of conclusion, it should be noted that, in contrast to the
way in which philosophy of science has developed in the Anglo-Saxon
sphere, works in Latin America have moved much more rapidly from the
merely “academic” stage, where discussions revolve around
what other colleagues (classical or contemporary) have proposed, to
the stage of critical reflection on the problems of broader social
environment in which scientific activity takes place. However, it
should also be noted that this expansion of horizons has not
negatively affected the research on the central problems of the
discipline (logical, semantic, methodological, pragmatic,
epistemological, and ontological), which continues to be the core of
the curriculum of the specialized degree programs, as well as of the
research centers where philosophy of science is developed.





Finally, it is worth stressing that the area has strongly progressed
despite the many obstacles that philosophical research faces in the
region; the erratic political situation and cyclical economic crisis
in Latin American countries influence research policies, placing
scholars in unstable and uncertain positions. Nevertheless, regardless
of the difficulties, at present a new generation of young philosophers
of science allows us to foresee that the philosophy of science
produced in Latin America will continue to grow in quantity and
quality, increasing its already considerable international
presence.






Bibliography




Abeledo, Horacio, 1995, “Lewis’s Causation: An Almost
Fatal Example”, 
Crítica: Revista Hispanoamericana de
Filosofía
, 27(81): 79–100.
doi:10.22201/iifs.18704905e.1995.1029


–––, 2000, “Lewis, Causation, Barometers:
Dubious Fate of an Example”, 
Crítica: Revista
Hispanoamericana de Filosofía
, 32(94): 127–144.
doi:10.22201/iifs.18704905e.2000.842


Accorinti, Hernán Lucas, 2019, “Incompatible Models
in Chemistry: The Case of Electronegativity”, 
Foundations of
Chemistry
, 21(1): 71–81.
doi:10.1007/s10698-018-09328-x


Accorinti, Hernán Lucas and Juan Camilo Martínez
González, 2022, “Models and Idealizations in Quantum
Chemistry: The Case of the Born-Oppenheimer Approximation”, in

Philosophical Perspectives in Quantum Chemistry
, Olimpia
Lombardi, Juan Camilo Martínez González, and Sebastian
Fortin (eds.), Synthese Library Series, Cham: Springer, 107–125.
doi:10.1007/978-3-030-98373-4_5


Acuña, Pablo, 2014a, “On the Empirical Equivalence
between Special Relativity and Lorentz׳s Ether Theory”,

Studies in History and Philosophy of Science Part B: Studies in
History and Philosophy of Modern Physics
, 46: 283–302.
doi:10.1016/j.shpsb.2014.01.002


–––, 2014b, “Artificial Examples of
Empirical Equivalence”, in 
New Directions in the Philosophy
of Science
, Maria Carla Galavotti, Dennis Dieks, Wenceslao J.
Gonzalez, Stephan Hartmann, Thomas Uebel, and Marcel Weber (eds.),
(The Philosophy of Science in a European Perspective 5), Cham:
Springer International Publishing, 453–467.
doi:10.1007/978-3-319-04382-1_31


–––, 2016a, “Minkowski Spacetime and
Lorentz Invariance: The Cart and the Horse or Two Sides of a Single
Coin?”, 
Studies in History and Philosophy of Science Part B:
Studies in History and Philosophy of Modern Physics
, 55:
1–12. doi:10.1016/j.shpsb.2016.04.002


–––, 2016b, “Inertial Trajectories in de
Broglie-Bohm Quantum Theory: An Unexpected Problem”,

International Studies in the Philosophy of Science
, 30(3):
201–230. doi:10.1080/02698595.2017.1316107


–––, 2019, “Charting the Landscape of
Interpretation, Theory Rivalry, and Underdetermination in Quantum
Mechanics”, 
Synthese
, 198(2): 1711-1740.
doi:10.1007/s11229-019-02159-z


–––, 2021a, “Von Neumann’s Theorem
Revisited”, 
Foundations of Physics
, 51(3): #73.
doi:10.1007/s10701-021-00474-5


–––, 2021b, “Must Hidden Variables
Theories Be Contextual? Kochen & Specker Meet von Neumann and
Gleason”, 
European Journal for Philosophy of Science
,
11(2): #41. doi:10.1007/s13194-021-00347-8


–––, 2021c, “Charting the Landscape of
Interpretation, Theory Rivalry, and Underdetermination in Quantum
Mechanics”, 
Synthese
, 198(2): 1711–1740.
doi:10.1007/s11229-019-02159-z


–––, 2023, “Scientific Understanding in
Astronomical Models from Eudoxus to Kepler”, in 
Current
Debates in Philosophy of Science: In Honor of Roberto Torretti
,
Cristián Soto (ed.), Synthese Library Series, Cham: Springer,
289–340. doi:10.1007/978-3-031-32375-1_12


Acuña, Pablo and Dennis Dieks, 2014, “Another Look at
Empirical Equivalence and Underdetermination of Theory Choice”,

European Journal for Philosophy of Science
, 4(2):
153–180. doi:10.1007/s13194-013-0080-3


Adúriz-Bravo, Agustín, 2004, “Methodology and
Politics: A Proposal to Teach the Structuring Ideas of the Philosophy
of Science through the Pendulum”, 
Science &
Education
, 13(7–8): 717–731.
doi:10.1007/s11191-004-5720-8


–––, 2007, “A Proposal to Teach the Nature
of Science (NOS) to Science Teachers: The Structuring Theoretical
Fields of NOS”, 
Review of Science, Mathematics, and ICT
Education
, 1(2): 41–56. doi:10.26220/rev.109
 [
Adúriz-Bravo 2007 available online
]


–––, 2011, “Fostering Model-Based School
Scientific Argumentation Among Prospective Science Teachers”,

US-China Education Review
, 8: 718–723.


–––, 2013, “A ‘Semantic’ View
of Scientific Models for Science Education”, 
Science &
Education
, 22(7): 1593–1611.
doi:10.1007/s11191-011-9431-7


–––, 2014, “Teaching the Nature of Science
with Scientific Narratives”, 
Interchange
,
45(3–4): 167–184. doi:10.1007/s10780-015-9229-7


Adúriz-Bravo, Agustín and Mercè
Izquierdo-Aymerich, 2005, “Utilising the ‘3P-Model’
to Characterise the Discipline of Didactics of Science”,

Science & Education
, 14(1): 29–41.
doi:10.1007/s11191-004-0068-7


–––, 2009, “A Research-Informed
Instructional Unit to Teach the Nature of Science to Pre-Service
Science Teachers”, 
Science & Education
, 18(9):
1177–1192. doi:10.1007/s11191-009-9189-3


Adúriz-Bravo, Agustín, Cristian Merino, and
Mercè Izquierdo-Aymerich, 2012, “An Approach to the
Construction of Chemistry Curricula on the Basis of Structuring
Theoretical Fields”, 
Journal of Science Education
, 13:
42–45.


Adúriz-Bravo, Agustín and Alger Sans Pinillos, 2023,
“Abduction as a Mode of Inference in Science Education”,

Science and Education
, 32(7–8): 993–1020.
doi:10.1007/s11191-022-00366-8.


Aguiar, Orlando, Hannah Sevian, and Charbel N. El-Hani, 2018,
“Teaching About Energy: Application of the Conceptual Profile
Theory to Overcome the Encapsulation of School Science
Knowledge”, 
Science & Education
, 27(9–10):
863–893. doi:10.1007/s11191-018-0010-z


Aguilera, Mariela, 2019, “Pictures, Content, and
Normativity: The Semantic of Graphic Rules”, 
Phenomenology
and Mind
, 17: 136–149. doi:10.13128/pam-8032


–––, 2021, “Heterogeneous Inferences with
Maps”, 
Synthese
, 199(1–2): 3805–3824.
doi:10.1007/s11229-020-02957-w


Aiello, Matías, Mario Castagnino, and Olimpia Lombardi,
2008, “The Arrow of Time: From Universe Time-Asymmetry to Local
Irreversible Processes”, 
Foundations of Physics
, 38(3):
257–292. doi:10.1007/s10701-007-9202-0


Alassia, Fiorela, 2023, “Correction to: A Process Ontology
Approach in Biochemistry: The Case of GPCRs and Biosignaling”.

Foundations of Chemistry
, 25(1): 189–206.
doi:10.1007/s10698-022-09461-8


Alchourrón, Carlos E., 1996, “Detachment and
Defeasibility in Deontic Logic”, 
Studia Logica
, 57(1):
5–18. doi:10.1007/BF00370667


Alchourrón, Carlos E., Peter Gärdenfors, and David
Makinson, 1985, “On the Logic of Theory Change: Partial Meet
Contraction and Revision Functions”, 
Journal of Symbolic
Logic
, 50(2): 510–530. doi:10.2307/2274239


Alchourrón, Carlos E. and David Makinson, 1981,
“Hierarchies of Regulations and Their Logic”, in 
New
Studies in Deontic Logic
, Risto Hilpinen (ed.), Dordrecht:
Springer Netherlands, 125–148.
doi:10.1007/978-94-009-8484-4_5


–––, 2008, “On the Logic of Theory Change:
Contraction Functions and Their Associated Revision Functions”,

Theoria
, 48(1): 14–37.
doi:10.1111/j.1755-2567.1982.tb00480.x


Aliseda, Atocha, 2003, “Mathematical Reasoning Vs. Abductive
Reasoning: A Structural Approach”, 
Synthese
, 134(1/2):
25–44. doi:10.1023/A:1022127429205


–––, 2006, 
Abductive Reasoning: Logical
Investigations into Discovery and Explanation
, (Synthese Library
330), Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
doi:10.1007/1-4020-3907-7


–––, 2022, “On Schurz’s Construction
Paradigm of Scientific Theory Development”, 
Journal for
General Philosophy of Science
, 54(3): 473–490.
doi:10.1007/s10838-021-09593-z


–––, 2023, “Introduction to Logics of
Hypothetical Reasoning, Abduction, and Evidence”, in Lorenzo
Magnani (ed.), 
Handbook of Abductive Cognition
, Cham:
Springer, 247–250. doi:10.1007/978-3-031-10135-9_82


Aliseda, Atocha and Laura Leonides, 2013, “Hypotheses
Testing in Adaptive Logics: An Application to Medical
Diagnosis”, 
Logic Journal of IGPL
, 21(6):
915–930. doi:10.1093/jigpal/jzt005


Alleva, Karina, José Díez, and Lucia Federico, 2017,
“Models, Theory Structure and Mechanisms in Biochemistry: The
Case of Allosterism”, 
Studies in History and Philosophy of
Science Part C: Studies in History and Philosophy of Biological and
Biomedical Sciences
, 63: 1–14.
doi:10.1016/j.shpsc.2017.03.004


Alonso-Pavón, José, Jocelyn Cheé-Santiago,
María Lucía Granados-Riveros, Marco Ornelas-Cruces,
Erica Torrens-Rojas, and Ana Barahona, 2021, “Genetics in
Mexico: Mapping the Discipline”, 
Archives Internationales
d’Histoire des Sciences
, 71(187): 6–35.
doi:10.1484/J.ARIHS.5.127400


Altamirano-Bustamante, Myriam, Adalberto de Hoyos, and León
Olivé, 2011, “Theory of Knowledge and Biotech Patents:
Worlds Apart?”, 
Nature Biotechnology
, 29(11):
977–978. doi:10.1038/nbt.2026


Amaya, Santiago, 2013, “Slips”, 
Noûs
,
47(3): 559–576. doi:10.1111/j.1468-0068.2011.00838.x


–––, 2015, “The Argument from
Slips”, in 
Agency, Freedom, and Moral Responsibility
,
Andrei Buckareff, Carlos Moya, and Sergi Rosell (eds.), London:
Palgrave Macmillan, 13–29. doi:10.1057/9781137414953_2


–––, 2021, “Out of Habit”,

Synthese
, 198(12), 11161–11185.
doi:10.1007/s11229-020-02780-3


Amaya, Santiago and John M. Doris, 2015, “No Excuses:
Performance Mistakes in Morality”, in 
Handbook of
Neuroethics
, Jens Clausen and Neil Levy (eds.), Dordrecht:
Springer, 253–272. doi:10.1007/978-94-007-4707-4_120


Anaya-Muñoz, Víctor Hugo, Vivette
García-Deister, and Edna Suárez-Díaz, 2017,
“Flattening and Unpacking Human Genetic Variation in Mexico,
Postwar to Present”, 
Science in Context
, 30(1):
89–112. doi:10.1017/S0269889717000047


Arango-Muñoz, Santiago, 2011, “Two Levels of
Metacognition”, 
Philosophia
, 39(1): 71–82.
doi:10.1007/s11406-010-9279-0


–––, 2013, “Scaffolded Memory and
Metacognitive Feelings”, 
Review of Philosophy and
Psychology
, 4(1): 135–152.
doi:10.1007/s13164-012-0124-1


–––, 2014, “The Nature of Epistemic
Feelings”, 
Philosophical Psychology
, 27(2):
193–211. doi:10.1080/09515089.2012.732002


–––, 2019, “Cognitive Phenomenology and
Metacognitive Feelings”, 
Mind & Language
, 34(2):
247–262. doi:10.1111/mila.12215


Arango-Muñoz, Santiago and Juan Pablo Bermúdez,
2018, “Remembering as a Mental Action”, in 
New
Directions in the Philosophy of Memory
, Kourken Michaelian,
Dorothea Debus, and Denis Perrin (eds.), New York: Routledge,
75–96. doi:10.4324/9781315159591


–––, 2021, “Intentional Mind-wandering as
Intentional Omission: The Surrealist Method”, 
Synthese
,
199(3-4), 7727–7748. doi:10.1007/s11229-021-03135-2


Ardenghi, Juan Sebastián, Mario Castagnino, and Olimpia
Lombardi, 2009, “Quantum Mechanics: Modal Interpretation and
Galilean Transformations”, 
Foundations of Physics
,
39(9): 1023–1045. doi:10.1007/s10701-009-9313-x


Ardenghi, Juan Sebastián, Olimpia Lombardi, and
Martín Narvaja, 2013, “Modal Interpretations and
Consecutive Measurements”, in 
EPSA11 Perspectives and
Foundational Problems in Philosophy of Science
, Vassilios
Karakostas and Dennis Dieks (eds.), Cham: Springer International
Publishing, 207–217. doi:10.1007/978-3-319-01306-0_17


Arenhart, Jonas Rafael Becker, 2017, “The Received View on
Quantum Non-Individuality: Formal and Metaphysical Analysis”,

Synthese
, 194(4), 1323–1347.
doi:10.1007/s11229-015-0997-5


–––, 2021, “The Evidence Approach to
Paraconsistency versus the Paraconsistent Approach to Evidence”,

Synthese
, 198(12): 11537–11559.
doi:10.1007/s11229-020-02813-x


–––, 2022a, “Interpreting Philosophical
Interpretations of Paraconsistency”, 
Synthese
, 200(6):
#449. doi:10.1007/s11229-022-03941-2


–––, 2022b, “Newton da Costa on
Hypothetical Models in Logic and on the Modal Status of Logical
Laws”, 
Axiomathes
, 32(6):1191–1211.
doi:10.1007/s10516-021-09577-0


–––, 2022c, “Logical
Anti‐exceptionalism Meets the
“Logic‐as‐Models” approach”,

Theoria
, 88(6): 1211–1227. doi:10.1111/theo.12436


Arenhart, Jonas Becker and Raoni Wohnrath Arroyo, 2021, “On
Physics, Metaphysics, and Metametaphysics”,

Metaphilosophy
, 52(2): 175–199.
doi:10.1111/meta.12486


Arenhart, Jonas Rafael Becker and Décio Krause, 2014a,
“From Primitive Identity to the Non-Individuality of Quantum
Objects”, 
Studies in History and Philosophy of Science Part
B: Studies in History and Philosophy of Modern Physics
, 46:
273–282. doi:10.1016/j.shpsb.2014.01.004


–––, 2014b, “Why Non-Individuality? A
Discussion on Individuality, Identity, and Cardinality in the Quantum
Context”, 
Erkenntnis
, 79(1): 1–18.
doi:10.1007/s10670-013-9429-4


–––, 2023, “Quasi-truth and Defective
Knowledge in Science: A Critical Examination”

Manuscrito
, 46(2): 122–155.
doi:10.1590/0100-6045.2023.v46n2.jd


Arroyo, Raoni Wohnrath and Jonas Becker Arenhart, 2022a,
“The Epistemic Value of Metaphysics”, 
Synthese
,
200: #337. doi:10.1007/s11229-022-03833-5


–––, 2022b, “Whence Deep Realism for
Everettian Quantum Mechanics?”, 
Foundations of Physics
,
52(6): #121. doi:10.1007/s10701-022-00643-0


Ávila, Alfonso, 2006, “What is Philosophy of
Mathematics Looking for?”, in 
18 Unconventional Essays on
the Nature of Mathematics
, Reuben Hersh (ed.), New York:
Springer, 236–249. doi:10.1007/0-387-29831-2_14


Ávila, Ignacio, 2014, “Evans on Bodily Awareness and
Perceptual Self-Location”, 
European Journal of
Philosophy
, 22(2): 269–287.
doi:10.1111/j.1468-0378.2012.00525.x


–––, 2015, “Perceiving the Intrinsic
Properties of Objects: On Noë’s Enactive View”,

Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences
, 14(1): 55–71.
doi:10.1007/s11097-013-9311-5


–––, 2017, “Is Bodily Awareness a Form of
Perception?”, 
Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences
,
16(3): 337–354. doi:10.1007/s11097-016-9453-3


Baedke, Jan, Alejandro Fábregas-Tejeda, and Francisco
Vergara-Silva, 2020, “Does the Extended Evolutionary Synthesis
Entail Extended Explanatory Power?”, 
Biology and
Philosophy
, 35(1): 1–22. doi:10.1007/s10539-020-9736-5


Baedke, Jan and Siobhan F. Mc Manus, 2018, “From Seconds to
Eons: Time Scales, Hierarchies, and Processes in Evo-Devo”,

Studies in History and Philosophy of Science Part C: Studies in
History and Philosophy of Biological and Biomedical Sciences
, 72:
38–48. doi:10.1016/j.shpsc.2018.10.006


Bair, Jacques, Piotr Błaszczyk, Elías Fuentes
Guillén, Peter Heinig, Vladimir Kanovei, and Mikhail G. Katz,
2020, “Continuity Between Cauchy and Bolzano: Issues of
Antecedents and Priority”, 
British Journal for the History
of Mathematics
, 35(3): 207–224.
doi:10.1080/26375451.2020.1770015


Balzer, Wolfgang and Pablo Lorenzano, 2000, “The Logical
Structure of Classical Genetics”, 
Journal for General
Philosophy of Science
, 31(2): 243–266.
doi:10.1023/A:1026544916567


Baptista, Geilsa Costa Santos and Charbel Niño El-Hani,
2009, “The Contribution of Ethnobiology to the Construction of a
Dialogue Between Ways of Knowing: A Case Study in a Brazilian Public
High School”, 
Science & Education
, 18(3–4):
503–520. doi:10.1007/s11191-008-9173-3


Barahona, Ana, 2007, “Science and Representation: The Case
of Genetic Maps”, 
History and Philosophy of the Life
Sciences
, 29(2): 145–159.


–––, 2022, “Games and Genes: Human
Diversity Meets Cytogenetics. Mexico 1968”, 
History and
Philosophy of the Life Sciences
, 44(4): #56.
doi:10.1007/s40656-022-00521-y


Baravalle, Lorenzo and Luciana Zaterka (eds.), 
Life and
Evolution: Latin American Essays on the History and Philosophy of
Biology
, Basel: Springer Nature Switzerland.
doi:10.1007/978-3-030-39589-6


Barrio, Eduardo Alejandro, 2010, “Theories of Truth without
Standard Models and Yablo’s Sequences”, 
Studia
Logica
, 96(3): 375–391. doi:10.1007/s11225-010-9289-8


Barrio, Eduardo Alejandro and Walter Carnielli (eds), 2020a,
“Volume I: Recovery Operators in Logics of Formal
Inconsistency”, special issue of 
Logic Journal of the
IGPL
, 28(5).


––– (eds), 2020b, “Volume II: New advances
in Logics of Formal Inconsistency”, special issue of 
Logic
Journal of the IGPL
, 28(5).


Barrio, Eduardo Alejandro, Nicolas Clerbout, and Shahid Rahman,
2020, “Introducing Consistency in a Dialogical Framework for
Paraconsistent Logic”, 
Logic Journal of the IGPL
,
28(5): 953-972. doi:10.1093/jigpal/jzy069


Barrio, Eduardo Alejandro and Bruno Da Ré, 2018a,
“Truth without Standard Models: Some Conceptual Problems
Reloaded”, 
Journal of Applied Non-Classical Logics
,
28(1): 122–139. doi:10.1080/11663081.2017.1397326


–––, 2018b, “Paraconsistency and Its
Philosophical Interpretations”, 
The Australasian Journal of
Logic
, 15(2): 151–170. doi:10.26686/ajl.v15i2.4860


Barrio, Eduardo and Paul Egre, 2022, Special Issue on
Substructural Logics and Metainferences, 
Journal of Philosophical
Logic
, 51(6).


Barrio, Eduardo Alejandro, Federico Matias Pailos, and Damian
Enrique Szmuc, 2017, “A Paraconsistent Route to Semantic
Closure”, 
Logic Journal of the IGPL
, 25(4):
387–407. doi:10.1093/jigpal/jzx009


–––, 2018a, “What Is a Paraconsistent
Logic?”, in 
Contradictions, from Consistency to
Inconsistency
, Walter Carnielli and Jacek Malinowski (eds.),
(Trends in Logic 47), Cham: Springer International Publishing,
89–108. doi:10.1007/978-3-319-98797-2_5


–––, 2018b, “Substructural Logics,
Pluralism and Collapse”, 
Synthese
, 198(Suppl 20):
4991-5007. doi:10.1007/s11229-018-01963-3


–––, 2020a, “A Recovery Operator for
Nontransitive Approaches”, 
The Review of Symbolic
Logic
, 13(1): 80-104. doi:10.1017/S1755020318000369


–––, 2020b, “A Hierarchy of Classical and
Paraconsistent Logics”, 
Journal of Philosophical Logic
,
49(1): 93–120. doi:10.1007/s10992-019-09513-z


Barrio, Eduardo Alejandro and Lavinia Picollo, 2013, “Notes
on ω-Inconsistent Theories of Truth in Second-Order
Languages”, 
The Review of Symbolic Logic
, 6(4):
733–741. doi:10.1017/S1755020313000269


Barrio, Eduardo Alejandro and Gonzalo Rodriguez-Pereyra, 2015,
“Truthmaker Maximalism Defended Again”, 
Analysis
,
75(1): 3–8. doi:10.1093/analys/anu121


Barrio, Eduardo Alejandro, Lucas Rosenblatt, and Diego Tajer,
2015, “The Logics of Strict-Tolerant Logic”, 
Journal
of Philosophical Logic
, 44(5): 551–571.
doi:10.1007/s10992-014-9342-6


–––, 2021, “Capturing Naive Validity in
the Cut-Free Approach”, 
Synthese
, 199(3):
707–723: doi:10.1007/s11229-016-1199-5


Barceló Aspeitia, Axel Arturo, Ángeles Eraña,
and Robert Stainton, 2010, “The Contribution of Domain
Specificity in the Highly Modular Mind”, 
Minds and
Machines
, 20(1): 19–27. doi:10.1007/s11023-010-9183-1


Beebee, Helen, 1997, “Counterfactual Dependence and Broken
Barometers: A Response to Flichman’s Argument”,

Crítica: Revista Hispanoamericana de Filosofía
,
29(86): 107–119. doi:10.22201/iifs.18704905e.1997.1065


Beirlaen, Mathieu and Atocha Aliseda, 2014, “A Conditional
Logic for Abduction”, 
Synthese
, 191(15):
3733–3758. doi:10.1007/s11229-014-0496-0


Belvedresi, Rosa E., 2012, “Global History and the Idea of
Universal History”, in 
New Perspectives in Global
History
, Daniel Brauer, Iwan D’Aprile, Günther Lottes,
and Concha Roldán (eds.), Hannover: Wehrhahn Verlag,
65–71.


–––, 2018, “A Philosophical Inquiry into
the Future as a Category of Historical Time”, in 
Philosophy
of Globalization
, Concha Roldán, Daniel Brauer, and
Johannes Rohbeck (eds.), Berlin: De Gruyter, 449–461.
doi:10.1515/9783110492415-033


–––, 2019, “Empathy and Historical
Understanding: a Reappraisal of ‘Empathic
Unsettlement’”, in 
Empathy: Emotional, Ethical and
Epistemological Narratives
, Ricardo Gutiérrez Aguilar
(ed.), Leiden: Brill, 162–177.
doi:10.1163/9789004398122_014


Benítez, Federico, Diego Maltrana, and Pablo Razeto-Barry,
2022, “(Re)interpreting 
E=mc
2
”,

Foundations of Physics
, 52(1): #15.
doi:10.1007/s10701-021-00530-0


Benítez, Laura, 1993, 
El Mundo en René
Descartes
, Mexico D.F.: UNAM.


–––, 2000, “Los 
lunarios
 en la
perspectiva de la filosofía natural de Carlos de Sigüenza
y Góngora”, in 
Carlos de Sigüenza y
Góngora. Homenaje 1700–2000
, Alice Mayer (ed.),
México D.F.: UNAM, 125–144.


–––, 2004, 
Descartes y el Conocimiento del
Mundo Natural
, Mexico D.F.: Porrúa.


–––, 2019, “Sensibility and Understanding
in the Epistemological Thought of Sor Juana Inés de la
Cruz”, in 
Feminist History of Philosophy: The Recovery and
Evaluation of Women’s Philosophical Thought
, Eileen
O’Neill and Marcy P. Lascano (eds.), Cham: Springer,
75–96. doi:10.1007/978-3-030-18118-5_4


Benítez, Laura and José A. Robles, 2000, 
Espacio
e Infinito en la Perspectiva de la Modernidad
, México
D.F.: Ediciones Cruz.


–––, 2006, 
De Newton y los Newtonianos:
entre Descartes y Berkeley
, Buenos Aires: Universidad Nacional de
Quilmes.


Bermúdez, Juan Pablo, 2017, “Do We Reflect While
Performing Skillful Actions? Automaticity, Control, and the Perils of
Distraction”, 
Philosophical Psychology
, 30(7):
896–924. doi:10.1080/09515089.2017.1325457


–––, 2021a, “The Skill of
Self-control”, 
Synthese
, 199(3–4):
6251–6273. doi:10.1007/s11229-021-03068-w


–––, 2021b, “Willpower Needs Tactical
Skill”, 
Behavioral and Brain Sciences
, 44(e32):
17–18. doi:10.31234/osf.io/32yxk


Bermúdez, Juan Pablo and Olivier Massin, 2023,
“Efforts and Their Feelings”, 
Philosophy Compass
,
18(1): #e12894. doi:10.1111/phc3.12894


Bermúdez, Juan Pablo, Samuel Murray, Louis Chartrand, and
Sergio Barbosa, 2021, “What’s Inside Is All That Counts?
The Contours of Everyday Thinking About Self-Control”,

Review of Philosophy and Psychology
, 14(1): 33–55.
doi:10.1007/s13164-021-00573-2


Bizzo, Nelio and Charbel N. El-Hani, 2009, “Darwin and
Mendel: Evolution and Genetics”, 
Journal of Biological
Education
, 43(3): 108–114.
doi:10.1080/00219266.2009.9656164


Bodanza, Gustavo Adrián, 2002, “Disjunctions and
Specificity in Suppositional Defeasible Argumentation”,

Logic Journal of IGPL
, 10(1): 23–49.
doi:10.1093/jigpal/10.1.23


–––, 2023, “On 
F
-Systems: A
Graph-Theoretic Model for Paradoxes Involving a Falsity Predicate and
Its Application to Argumentation Frameworks”, 
Journal of
Logic, Language and Information
, 32(3): 373–393.
doi:10.1007/s10849-023-09394-1


Bodanza, Gustavo Adrián and Claudio Andrés Alessio,
2017, “Rethinking Specificity in Defeasible Reasoning and Its
Effect in Argument Reinstatement”, 
Information and
Computation
, 255: 287–310.
doi:10.1016/j.ic.2017.01.006


Bodanza, Gustavo and Enrique Hernández-Manfredini, 2023,
“The Status of Arguments in Abstract Argumentation Frameworks. A
Tableaux Method.” 
Manuscrito
, 46(2): 66–108.
doi:10.1590/0100-6045.2023.v46n2.ge


Bodanza, Gustavo and Fernando Tohmé, 2005, “Local
Logics, Non-Monotonicity and Defeasible Argumentation”,

Journal of Logic, Language and Information
, 14(1):
1–12. doi:10.1007/s10849-005-4510-2


–––, 2009, “Two Approaches to the Problems
of Self-Attacking Arguments and General Odd-Length Cycles of
Attack”, 
Journal of Applied Logic
, 7(4): 403–420.
doi:10.1016/j.jal.2007.06.012


Bodanza, Gustavo, Fernando Tohmé, and Marcelo Auday, 2017,
“Collective Argumentation: A Survey of Aggregation Issues around
Argumentation Frameworks”, 
Argument & Computation
,
8(1): 1–34. doi:10.3233/AAC-160014


Bodanza, Gustavo, Fernando Tohmé, and Guillermo Simari,
2016, “Beyond Admissibility: Accepting Cycles in Argumentation
with Game Protocols for Cogency Criteria”, 
Journal of Logic
and Computation
, 26(4): 1235–1255.
doi:10.1093/logcom/exu004


Boido, Angel Guillermo, 1996, 
Noticias del Planeta Tierra.
Galileo Galilei y la Revolución Científica
, Buenos
Aires: A-Z Editora.


Bobenrieth, Andrés, 1998, “Five Philosophical
Problems Related to Paraconsistent Logic”, 
Logique et
Analyse
, 41(161–163): 21–30.


Borge, Bruno, 2015, “Realismo científico hoy: a 40
años de la formulación del argumento del
no-milagro”, 
Acta Scientiarum. Human and Social
Sciences
, 37(2): 221–233.
doi:10.4025/actascihumansoc.v37i2.26933


–––, 2021, “Disagreement About Scientific
Ontology”, 
Journal for General Philosophy of Science
,
on line first. doi:10.1007/s10838-020-09542-2


Borge, Bruno and Nélida Gentile (eds.), 2019, 
La
Ciencia y el Mundo Inobservable. Discusiones Contemporáneas en
torno al Realismo Científico
, Buenos Aires: Eudeba.


Borge, Bruno and Nicolás Lo Guercio, 2021, “Learning
from Scientific Disagreement”, 
Theoria: An International
Journal for Theory, History and Foundations of Science
, 36(3):
375–398. doi:10.1387/theoria.21967


Brauer, Daniel, 2018, “Theory and Practice of Historical
Writing in Times of Globalization”, in 
Philosophy of
Globalization
, Concha Roldán, Daniel Brauer, and Johannes
Rohbeck (eds.), Berlin: De Gruyter, 397–408.
doi:10.1515/9783110492415-029


Brauer, Daniel, Iwan Michelangelo D’Aprile, Günther
Lottes, and Concha Roldán (eds.), 2012, 
New Perspectives in
Global History
, Hannover: Wehrhahn Verlag.


Bueno-Hernández, Alfredo, Ana Barahona, Juan J. Morrone,
David Espinosa and Fabiola Juárez-Barrera, 2023,
“Historiographical Approaches to Biogeography: A Critical
Review”, 
History and Philosophy of the Life Sciences
,
45(3): #27. doi:10.1007/s40656-023-00580-9


Bunge, Mario, 1959a, 
Causality; the Place of the Causal
Principle in Modern Science
, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press.


–––, 1959b, 
Metascientific Queries
,
Springfield, IL: C. C. Thomas.


–––, 1960, “The Place of Induction in
Science”, 
Philosophy of Science
, 27(3): 262–270.
doi:10.1086/287745


–––, 1961a, “Kinds and Criteria of
Scientific Laws”, 
Philosophy of Science
, 28(3):
260–281. doi:10.1086/287809


–––, 1961b, “The Weight of Simplicity in
the Construction and Assaying of Scientific Theories”,

Philosophy of Science
, 28(2): 120–149.
doi:10.1086/287794


–––, 1962a, “The Complexity of
Simplicity”, 
Journal of Philosophy
, 59(5):
113–135. doi:10.2307/2023305


–––, 1962b, 
Intuition and Science
,
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.


–––, 1963, 
The Myth of Simplicity. Problems
of Scientific Philosophy
, Englewood Cliffs, NJ:
Prentice-Hall.


–––, 1967, 
Foundations of Physics
, New
York: Springer-Verlag.


–––, 1974–1989, 
Treatise on Basic
Philosophy
, 8 volumes, Dordrecht: Reidel.


–––, 2003, 
Emergence and Convergence:
Qualitative Novelty and the Unity of Knowledge
, Toronto:
University of Toronto Press.


–––, 2006, 
Chasing Reality: Strife over
Realism
, Toronto: University of Toronto Press.


–––, 2013, 
Medical Philosophy: Conceptual
Issues in Medicine
, London: World Scientific Publishing
Company.


–––, 2014, 
Memorias entre Dos Mundos
,
Buenos Aires: Gedisa.


Caponi, Gustavo, 2013, “Teleología naturalizada: los
conceptos de función, aptitud y adaptación en la
teoría de la selección natural”, 
Theoria: An
International Journal for Theory, History and Foundations of
Science
, 28(1): 97–114. doi:10.1387/theoria.3000


–––, 2022, “The Darwinian Turn in the
Understanding of Biological Environment”, 
Biological
Theory
, 17: 20–35. doi:10.1007/s13752-020-00344-9


Cardona Suárez, Carlos Alberto, 2016, “Kepler:
Analogies in the search for the law of refraction”, 
Studies
in History and Philosophy of Science Part A
, 59: 22–-35.
doi:10.1016/j.shpsa.2016.05.004


Cardona Suárez, Carlos Alberto and Juliana Gutiérrez
Valderrama, 2020, “The Law of Refraction and Kepler’s
Heuristics”, 
Archive for History of Exact Sciences
, 74:
45–75. doi:10.1007/s00407-019-00236-w


Carman, Christián Carlos, 2005a, “‘Realismo
científico’ se dice de muchas maneras, al menos de 1111:
una elucidación del término ‘realismo
científico’”, 
Scientiae Studia
, 3(1):
43–64. doi:10.1590/S1678-31662005000100003


–––, 2005b, “La distinción
teórico/observacional: ¿favorece o perjudica al realismo
científico?”, 
Crítica: Revista
Hispanoamericana de Filosofía
, 37(111): 83–96.
doi:10.22201/iifs.18704905e.2005.461


–––, 2005c, “El argumento inductivo de
Harré: algunas inconsistencias”, 
Ágora:
Papeles de Filosofía
, 24(2): 245–259.
 [
Carman 2005c available online
]


–––, 2009, “Rounding Numbers:
Ptolemy’s Calculation of the Earth–Sun Distance”,

Archive for History of Exact Sciences
, 63(2): 205–242.
doi:10.1007/s00407-008-0038-6


–––, 2010a, “Predicciones coincidentes (un
reformulación del argumento del no-milagro)”,

Ágora: Papeles de Filosofía
, 29(1):
25–51.
 [
Carman 2010b available online
]


–––, 2010b, “On the Determination of
Planetary Distances in the Ptolemaic System”, 
International
Studies in the Philosophy of Science
, 24(3): 257–265.
doi:10.1080/02698595.2010.522408


–––, 2014, “Two Problems in
Aristarchus’s Treatise 
On the Sizes and Distances of the Sun
and Moon
”, 
Archive for History of Exact Sciences
,
68(1): 35–65. doi:10.1007/s00407-013-0123-3


–––, 2015, “The Planetary Increase of
Brightness during Retrograde Motion: An Explanandum Constructed Ad
Explanantem”, 
Studies in History and Philosophy of Science
Part A
, 54: 90–101. doi:10.1016/j.shpsa.2015.09.007


–––, 2017a, “Martianus Capella’s
Calculation of the Size of the Moon”, 
Archive for History of
Exact Sciences
, 71(2): 193–210.
doi:10.1007/s00407-016-0185-0


–––, 2017b, “Heraclides of Pontus on the
Solar Anomaly”, 
Almagest
, 8(1): 119–125.
doi:10.1484/J.ALMAGEST.5.113699


–––, 2018, “The First Copernican Was
Copernicus: The Difference between Pre-Copernican and Copernican
Heliocentrism”, 
Archive for History of Exact Sciences
,
72(1): 1–20. doi:10.1007/s00407-017-0198-3


–––, 2020, “Tycho Brahe’s

Calculi ad Corrigenda Elementa Orbitae Saturni
 and the
Technical Aspects of His Planetary Model of Saturn”, 
Archive
for History of Exact Sciences
, 74(6): 565–586.
doi:10.1007/s00407-020-00253-0


–––, 2021, “The Tychonic Method for
Calculating the Ratio between the Eccentricities of Mars”,

Journal for the History of Astronomy
, 52(2): 212–234.
doi:10.1177/00218286211014311


–––, 2022a, “The Challenge of Scientific
Realism to Intelligent Design”, 
European Journal for
Philosophy of Religion
, 14(4): 42–69.
doi:10.24204/ejpr.2022.3685


–––, 2022b, “The Great Martian Catastrophe
and how Tycho (Re-)fixed it”, 
Almagest. International
Journal for the History of Scientific Ideas
, 13(1): 42–57.
doi:10.1484/J.ALMAGEST.5.131488


–––, 2022c, “François
Viète’s Method for Calculating the Eccentricity in a
Bisected Model and Its Possible Application to Kepler’s
Vicarious Hypothesis”, 
Historia Mathematica
, 58:
71–91. doi:10.1016/j.hm.2021.09.002


Carman, Christián Carlos and José Díez, 2015,
“Did Ptolemy Make Novel Predictions? Launching Ptolemaic
Astronomy into the Scientific Realism Debate”, 
Studies in
History and Philosophy of Science Part A
, 52: 20–34.
doi:10.1016/j.shpsa.2015.04.002


Carman, Christián Carlos and James Evans, 2014, “On
the Epoch of the Antikythera Mechanism and Its Eclipse
Predictor”, 
Archive for History of Exact Sciences
,
68(6): 693–774. doi:10.1007/s00407-014-0145-5


Carman, Christián Carlos and Gonzalo Recio, 2022,
“Tycho Brahe’s Appendix ad 
Observationes anni
1593
 and the Date of Brahe’s Theory of Mars, the Prototype
for Kepler’s Vicarious Hypothesis”, 
Journal for the
History of Astronomy
, 53(3): 239–265.
doi:10.1177/00218286221099993


Carman, Christián Carlos, Alan Thorndike, and James Evans,
2012, “On the Pin-and-Slot Device of the Antikythera Mechanism,
with a New Application to the Superior Planets”, 
Journal for
the History of Astronomy
, 43(1): 93–116.
doi:10.1177/002182861204300106


Carnielli, Walter and Marcelo Coniglio, 2007 [2016],
“Combining Logics”, in 
The Stanford Encyclopedia of
Philosophy
, (Winter 2016), Edward N. Zalta (ed.), URL =
 <
https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/win2016/entries/logic-combining/
>


Carnielli, Walter, Marcelo Coniglio, and Itala D’Ottaviano,
2009, “New Dimensions on Translations Between Logics”,

Logica Universalis
, 3(1): 1–18.
doi:10.1007/s11787-009-0002-5


Carnielli, Walter, Marcelo Coniglio, and João Marcos, 2007,
“Logics of Formal Inconsistency”, in 
Handbook of
Philosophical Logic, Volume 14
, Dov Gabbay and Franz Guenthner
(eds.), Dordrecht: Springer Netherlands, 1–93.
doi:10.1007/978-1-4020-6324-4_1


Carnielli, Walter and Jacek Malinowski (eds.), 2018,

Contradictions, from Consistency to Inconsistency
. Cham:
Springer. doi:10.1007/978-3-319-98797-2


Carnielli, Walter and Abilio Rodrigues, 2019, “An Epistemic
Approach to Paraconsistency: A Logic of Evidence and Truth”,

Synthese
, 196(9): 3789–3813.
doi:10.1007/s11229-017-1621-7


Carrillo, Natalia and Tarja Knuuttila, 2021, “An Artifactual
Perspective on Idealization: Constant Capacitance and the Hodgkin and
Huxley Model”, in 
Models and Idealizations in Science:
Artifactual and Fictional Approaches
, Alejandro Cassini and Juan
Redmond (eds.), Cham: Springer, 51–70.
doi:10.1007/978-3-030-65802-1_2.


–––, 2022, “Holistic Idealization: An
Artifactual Standpoint.” 
Studies in the History and
Philosophy of Science
, 91: 49–59.
doi:10.1016/j.shpsa.2021.10.009


–––, 2023, “Mechanisms and the Problem of
Abstract Models”, 
European Journal for Philosophy of
Science
, 13(3): #27. doi:10.1007/s13194-023-00530-z


Casanueva, Mario, 1997, “Genetics and Fertilization: a Good
Marriage”, in 
Representations of Scientific
Rationality
, Andoni Ibarra and Thomas Mormann (eds.). Amsterdam:
Rodopi, 321–358. doi:10.1163/9789004457614_014


–––, 2011, “A Structuralist Reconstrucion
of the Mechanism of Natural Selection in Set Theory, and Graph
Formats”, in 
Darwin’s Evolving Legacy
, Jorge
Martínez Contreras and Aura Ponce de León (eds),
México: Siglo XXI, 177–192.


Casanueva, Mario and Bernado Bolaños (eds), 2009, 
El
Giro Pictórico. Epistemología de la Imagen
,
Cuajimalpa: Anthropos-UAM.


Casanueva, Mario and Ximena González-Grandón, 2016,
“Introduction: Models, Images and Representations”,

Scientiae Studia
, 14(1): 9–18.
doi:10.11606/S1678-31662016000100002


Cassini, Alejandro, 2003, “Confirmación
hipotético-deductiva y confirmación bayesiana”,

Análisis Filosófico
, 23(1): 41–84.


–––, 2013, “Modelos, idealizaciones: una
crítica del ficcionalismo”, 
Principia: An
International Journal of Epistemology
, 17(3): 345.
doi:10.5007/1808-1711.2013v17n3p345


–––, 2018, “Modelos sin target”,

Artefactos. Revista de Estudios de la Ciencia y la
Tecnología
, 7(2): 185–209.
doi:10.14201/art201872185209


Cassini, Alejandro and Marcelo Leonardo Levinas, 2005, “La
reinterpretación radical del experimento de Michelson-Morley
por la relatividad especial”, 
Scientiae Studia
, 3(4):
547–581. doi:10.1590/S1678-31662005000400002


–––, 2008, “La explicación de
Einstein del efecto fotoeléctrico: un análisis
histórico-epistemológico”, 
Revista
Latinoamericana de Filosofía
, 34(1): 5–38.


–––, 2009, “El éter relativista: un
cambio conceptual inconcluso”, 
Crítica: Revista
Hispanoamericana de Filosofía
, 41(123): 3–38.
doi:10.22201/iifs.18704905e.2009.912


–––, 2019, “Einstein’s
Reinterpretation of the Fizeau Experiment: How It Turned out to Be
Crucial for Special Relativity”, 
Studies in History and
Philosophy of Science Part B: Studies in History and Philosophy of
Modern Physics
, 65: 55–72.
doi:10.1016/j.shpsb.2018.08.004


Cassini, Alejandro, Leonardo Levinas, and Hernán Pringe,
2013, “Einstein y el efecto Compton”, 
Scientiae
Studia
, 11(1): 185–209.
doi:10.1590/S1678-31662013000100009


–––, 2015, “Einstein y la evidencia
experimental a favor de la hipótesis del cuanto de luz”,

Scientiae Studia
, 13(1): 73–96.
doi:10.1590/S1678-31662015000100004


Castagnino, Mario, Sebastian Fortin, and Olimpia Lombardi, 2010,
“Is the decoherence of a system the result of its interaction
with the environment?”, 
Modern Physics Letters A
,
25(17): 1431–1439. doi:10.1142/S0217732310032664


Castagnino, Mario, Manuel Gadella, and Olimpia Lombardi, 2006,
“Time-Reversal, Irreversibility and Arrow of Time in Quantum
Mechanics”, 
Foundations of Physics
, 36(3):
407–426. doi:10.1007/s10701-005-9021-0


Castagnino, Mario, Roberto Laura, and Olimpia Lombardi, 2007,
“A General Conceptual Framework for Decoherence in Closed and
Open Systems”, 
Philosophy of Science
, 74(5):
968–980. doi:10.1086/525637


Castagnino, Mario and Olimpia Lombardi, 2004, “Self-Induced
Decoherence: A New Approach”, 
Studies in History and
Philosophy of Science Part B: Studies in History and Philosophy of
Modern Physics
, 35(1): 73–107.
doi:10.1016/j.shpsb.2003.03.001


–––, 2005, “Self‐Induced Decoherence
and the Classical Limit of Quantum Mechanics”, 
Philosophy of
Science
, 72(5): 764–776. doi:10.1086/508945


–––, 2007, “Non-Integrability and Mixing
in Quantum Systems: On the Way to Quantum Chaos”, 
Studies in
History and Philosophy of Science Part B: Studies in History and
Philosophy of Modern Physics
, 38(3): 482–513.
doi:10.1016/j.shpsb.2006.07.002


–––, 2009, “The Global Non-Entropic Arrow
of Time: From Global Geometrical Asymmetry to Local Energy
Flow”, 
Synthese
, 169(1): 1–25.
doi:10.1007/s11229-009-9495-y


Castagnino, Mario, Olimpia Lombardi, and Luis Lara, 2003,
“The Global Arrow of Time as a Geometrical Property of the
Universe”, 
Foundations of Physics
, 33(6):
877–912. doi:10.1023/A:1025665410999


Chamizo, José Antonio, 2013, “Technochemistry: One of
the Chemists’ Ways of Knowing”, 
Foundations of
Chemistry
, 15(2): 157–170.
doi:10.1007/s10698-013-9179-z


–––, 2017, “The Fifth Chemical Revolution:
1973–1999”, 
Foundations of Chemistry
, 19(2):
157–179. doi:10.1007/s10698-017-9280-9


–––, 2019, “About Continuity and Rupture
in the History of Chemistry: The Fourth Chemical Revolution
(1945–1966)”, 
Foundations of Chemistry
, 21(1):
11–29. doi:10.1007/s10698-018-9308-9


Ciepielewski, Gerardo Sanjuán, Elías Okon, and
Daniel Sudarsky, 2021, “On Superdeterministic Rejections of
Settings Independence”, 
The British Journal for the
Philosophy of Science
, 74(2): 435–467.
doi:10.1086/714819


Cocchiarella, Nino B. and Max A. Freund, 2008, 
Modal Logic: An
Introduction to Its Syntax and Semantics
, Oxford: Oxford
University Press. doi:10.1093/acprof:oso/9780195366587.001.0001


Comte, Auguste, 1851, 
Système de Politique Positive,
Ou, Traite de Sociologie Instituant La Religion de
L’Humanite
, Paris: La Libraire Scientifique e Industrielle
de L. Mathias.
 [
Comte 1851 available online
]


Córdoba, Mariana, 2020, “Making Genders: The
Biotechnological and Legal Management of Identity”, in

Feminist Philosophy of Technology (second volume of the book
series Techno:Phil - Aktuelle Herausforderungen der
Technikphilosophie
, Berlin: Springer, pp. 225–243.
doi:10.1007/978-3-476-04967-4_12


–––, 2021, “The Biological Turn on
Personal Identity. The Role Of Science as a Response to
Children’s Appropriation in Argentinian Dictatorship
(1976-1983)”, 
Foundations of Science
, 26(2):
405–427. doi:10.1007/s10699-019-09628-1


Córdoba, Mariana and Olimpia Lombardi, 2013, “A
Kantian Perspective for the Philosophy of Chemistry”, in 
The
Philosophy of Chemistry: Practices, Methodologies, and Concepts
,
Jean-Pierre Llored (ed.), Newcastle upon Tyne: Cambridge Scholars
Publishing, 478–490.


Córdoba, Mariana and Alfio Zambon, 2017, “How to
Handle Nanomaterials? The Re-Entry of Individuals into the Philosophy
of Chemistry”, 
Foundations of Chemistry
, 19(3):
185–196. doi:10.1007/s10698-017-9283-6


Crelier, Andrés, 2022, “Attributing Psychological
Predicates to Non-human Animals: Literalism and its Limits”,

Review of Philosophy and Psychology
, on line first.
doi:10.1007/s13164-022-00643-z


Crespo, Ricardo F., Fernando Tohmé, and Daniel Heymann,
2010, “Abducing the Crisis”, in 
Model-Based Reasoning
in Science and Technology
, Lorenzo Magnani, Walter Carnielli, and
Claudio Pizzi (eds.), (Studies in Computational Intelligence 314),
Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 179–198.
doi:10.1007/978-3-642-15223-8_9


Cupani, Alberto, 2023, “The Specificity of Technological
Knowledge”, in 
Portuguese Philosophy of Technology. Legacies
and Contemporary Work from the Portuguese-Speaking Community
,
Helena Mateus Jerónimo (ed.), Cham: Springer, 145–161.
doi:10.1007/978-3-031-14630-5_10


Cussins, Adrian, 2012, “Environmental Representation of the
Body”, 
Review of Philosophy and Psychology
, 3(1):
15–32. doi:10.1007/s13164-012-0086-3


Da Costa, Newton C. A., Otávio Bueno, and Steven French,
1998, “The Logic of Pragmatic Truth”, 
Journal of
Philosophical Logic
, 27(6): 603–620.
doi:10.1023/A:1004304228785


Da Costa, Newton C. A., and Steven French, 1989, “Pragmatic
Truth and the Logic of Induction”, 
The British Journal for
the Philosophy of Science
, 40(3): 333–356.
doi:10.1093/bjps/40.3.333


–––, 1990, “The Model-Theoretic Approach
in the Philosophy of Science”, 
Philosophy of Science
,
57(2): 248–265. doi:10.1086/289546


–––, 1991, “On Russell’s Principle
of Induction”, 
Synthese
, 86(2): 285–295.
doi:10.1007/BF00485812


–––, 1993, “A Model Theoretic Approach to
‘Natural’ Reasoning”, 
International Studies in
the Philosophy of Science
, 7(2): 177–190.
doi:10.1080/02698599308573462


–––, 2003, 
Science and Partial Truth: A
Unitary Approach to Models and Scientific Reasoning
, (Oxford
Studies in the Philosophy of Science), Oxford: Oxford University
Press. doi:10.1093/019515651X.001.0001


Da Costa, Newton C. A. and Décio Krause, 1994,
“Schrödinger Logics”, 
Studia Logica
, 53(4):
533–550. doi:10.1007/BF01057649


–––, 1997, “An Intensional
Schrödinger Logic”, 
Notre Dame Journal of Formal
Logic
, 38(2): 179–194. doi:10.1305/ndjfl/1039724886


–––, 2014, “Physics, Inconsistency, and
Quasi-Truth”, 
Synthese
, 191(13): 3041–3055.
doi:10.1007/s11229-014-0472-8


–––, 2016, “An Application of
Paraconsistent Logic to Physics: Complementarity”, in

Towards Paraconsistent Engineering
, Seiki Akama (ed.),
(Intelligent Systems Reference Library 110), Cham: Springer
International Publishing, 25–34.
doi:10.1007/978-3-319-40418-9_3


Da Costa, Newton and Jonas Becker Arenhart, 2018,
“Full-Blooded Anti-Exceptionalism About Logic”,

Australasian Journal of Logic
, 15(2): 362–380.
doi:10.26686/ajl.v15i2.4865


Da Costa, Newton and Olimpia Lombardi, 2014, “Quantum
Mechanics: Ontology Without Individuals”, 
Foundations of
Physics
, 44(12): 1246–1257.
doi:10.1007/s10701-014-9793-1


Da Costa, Newton, Olimpia Lombardi, and Mariano Lastiri, 2013,
“A Modal Ontology of Properties for Quantum Mechanics”,

Synthese
, 190(17): 3671–3693.
doi:10.1007/s11229-012-0218-4


Da Ré, Bruno and Lucas Rosenblatt, 2018,
“Contraction, Infinitary Quantifiers, and Omega
Paradoxes”, 
Journal of Philosophical Logic
, 47(4):
611–629. doi:10.1007/s10992-017-9441-2


Dagnino, Renato, 2023, “Solidary Technoscience: A Concept
for the Philosophy of Technology”, in 
Portuguese Philosophy
of Technology. Legacies and Contemporary Work from the
Portuguese-Speaking Community
, Helena Mateus Jerónimo
(ed.), Cham: Springer, 305–320.
doi:10.1007/978-3-031-14630-5_17


Dalla Chiara, Maria Luisa, Roberto Giuntini, and Décio
Krause, 1998, “Quasi Set Theories for Microobjects: A
Comparison”, in 
Interpreting Bodies: Classical and Quantum
Objects in Modern Physics
, Elena Castellani (ed), Princeton:
Princeton University Press, 142–153.


Danón, Laura, 2019a, “Neo-pragmatism, Primitive
Intentionality and Animal Minds”, 
Philosophia: Philosophical
Quarterly of Israel
, 47(1): 39–58.
doi:10.1007/s11406-018-9963-z


–––, 2019b, “Animal Normativity”,

Phenomenology and the Mind
, 17: 176–187.
doi:10.13128/pam-8035


–––, 2022a, “Modest Propositional Contents
in Non-human Animals”, 
Philosophies
, 7(5): #93.
doi:10.3390/philosophies7050093


–––, 2022b, “Conceptual Recombination and
Stimulus-Independence in Non-Human Animals”, 
Theoria: An
International Journal for Theory, History and Foundations of
Science
, 37(3): 309–330. doi:10.1387/theoria.23638


Danón, Laura and Daniel Kalpokas, 2017, “Perceiving
Mental States: Co-Presence and Constitution”, 
Filosofia
Unisinos
, 18(2): 87–97. doi:10.4013/fsu.2017.182.03


De Barros, José Acacio, Federico Holik, and Décio
Krause, 2022, “Quantum Identity, Content, and Context: From
Classical to Non-classical Logic”, in 
From Electrons to
Elephants and Elections: Exploring the Role of Content and
Context
, Shyam Wuppuluri and Ian Stewart (eds.), The Frontiers
Collection, Cham: Springer, 489–521.
doi:10.1007/978-3-030-92192-7_27


de Carvalho, Ítalo Nascimento, Charbel N. El-Hani, and Nei
Nunes-Neto, 2020, “How Should We Select Conceptual Content for
Biology High School Curricula?”, 
Science &
Education
, 29(3): 513–547.
doi:10.1007/s11191-020-00115-9


De la Vega, Iván and Hebe Vessuri, 2008, “Science and
Mobility: Is Physical Location Relevant?”, 
Technology in
Society
, 30(1): 71–83.
doi:10.1016/j.techsoc.2007.10.003


Díaz, José-Luis, 1995, “Hunting for
Consciousness in the Brain: What Is (the Name of) the Game?”,

Behavioral and Brain Sciences
, 18(4): 679–680.
doi:10.1017/S0140525X00040437


–––, 2000, “Mind-Body Unity, Dual Aspect,
and the Emergence of Consciousness”, 
Philosophical
Psychology
, 13(3): 393–403.
doi:10.1080/09515080050128187


Díez, José and Pablo Lorenzano, 2013, “Who Got
What Wrong? Fodor and Piattelli on Darwin: Guiding Principles and
Explanatory Models in Natural Selection”, 
Erkenntnis
,
78(5): 1143–1175. doi:10.1007/s10670-012-9414-3


–––, 2015, “Are Natural Selection
Explanatory Models a Priori?”, 
Biology &
Philosophy
, 30(6): 787–809.
doi:10.1007/s10539-015-9498-7


Díez, José, Gonzalo Recio, and Christián
Carman, 2022, “Does Explaining Past Success Require (Enough)
Retention? The Case of Ptolemaic Astronomy”, 
Journal for
General Philosophy of Science
, 53(4): 323–344.
doi:10.1007/s10838-021-09589-9


Di Paolo, Ezequiel, Diego Lawler, and Andrés Vaccari, 2023,
“Toward an Enactive Conception of Productive Practices: Beyond
Material Agency”, 
Philosophy & Technology
, 36(2):
#31. doi:10.1007/s13347-023-00632-9


Domenech, Graciela, Federico Holik, and Décio Krause, 2008,
“Q-Spaces and the Foundations of Quantum Mechanics”,

Foundations of Physics
, 38(11): 969–994.
doi:10.1007/s10701-008-9246-9


Domingues, Ivan, 2023, “Four Visions of Technology”,
in 
Portuguese Philosophy of Technology. Legacies and Contemporary
Work from the Portuguese-Speaking Community
, Helena Mateus
Jerónimo (ed.), Cham: Springer, 127–144.
doi:10.1007/978-3-031-14630-5_9


Dos Santos, Vanessa Carvalho, Leyla Mariane Joaquim, and Charbel
Niño El-Hani, 2012, “Hybrid Deterministic Views About
Genes in Biology Textbooks: A Key Problem in Genetics Teaching”,

Science & Education
, 21(4): 543–578.
doi:10.1007/s11191-011-9348-1


Dussel, Enrique D., 1995, 
The Invention of the
Americas : Eclipse of “the Other” and the Myth of
Modernity
, Michael D. Barber (trans.), New York: Continuum.
Translated from: Dussel, Enrique D., 1993, 
El Encubrimiento del
Otro. Hacia el origen del mito de la modernidad
, Madrid: Nueva
Utopía.


Earman, John, 1974, “An Attempt to Add a Little Direction to
‘The Problem of the Direction of Time’”,

Philosophy of Science
, 41(1): 15–47.
doi:10.1086/288568


Edgington, Dorothy, 1990, “Explanation, Causation and
Laws”, 
Crítica: Revista Hispanoamericana de
Filosofía
, 22(66): 55–73.
doi:10.22201/iifs.18704905e.1990.776


El-Hani, Charbel Niño, 2008, “Theory-Based Approaches
to the Concept of Life”, 
Journal of Biological
Education
, 42(4): 147–149.
doi:10.1080/00219266.2008.9656132


–––, 2015, “Mendel in Genetics Teaching:
Some Contributions from History of Science and Articles for
Teachers”, 
Science & Education
, 24(1–2):
173–204. doi:10.1007/s11191-014-9685-y


El-Hani, Charbel Niño and Claus Emmeche, 2000, “On
Some Theoretical Grounds for an Organism-Centered Biology: Property
Emergence, Supervenience, and Downward Causation”, 
Theory in
Biosciences
, 119(3–4): 234–275.
doi:10.1007/s12064-000-0018-0


El-Hani, Charbel Niño and Antonio Marcos Pereira, 1999,
“Understanding Biological Causation”, in 
Where Biology
Meets Psychology: Philosophical Essays
, Valerie Hardcastle (ed.),
Cambridge MA: MIT Press, 333–356.
doi:10.7551/mitpress/7220.003.0018


El-Hani, Charbel Niño, João Queiroz, and Claus
Emmeche, 2006, “A Semiotic Analysis of the Genetic Information
System”, 
Semiotica
, 2006(160): 1–68.
doi:10.1515/SEM.2006.039


El-Hani, Charbel N., João Queiroz, and Frederik Stjernfelt,
2010, “Firefly Femmes Fatales: A Case Study in the Semiotics of
Deception”, 
Biosemiotics
, 3(1): 33–55.
doi:10.1007/s12304-009-9048-2


Eraña, Angeles, 2012, “Dual Process Theories versus
Massive Modularity Hypotheses”, 
Philosophical
Psychology
, 25(6): 855–872.
doi:10.1080/09515089.2011.631994


Erduran, Sibel, Agustin Adúriz Bravo, and Rachel Mamlok
Naaman, 2007, “Developing Epistemologically Empowered Teachers:
Examining the Role of Philosophy of Chemistry in Teacher
Education”, 
Science & Education
, 16(9–10):
975–989. doi:10.1007/s11191-006-9072-4


Esposito, Maurizio, 2011, “Utopianism in the British
Evolutionary Synthesis”, 
Studies in History and Philosophy
of Science Part C: Studies in History and Philosophy of Biological and
Biomedical Sciences
, 42(1): 40–49.
doi:10.1016/j.shpsc.2010.11.007


–––, 2017, “Expectation and Futurity: The
Remarkable Success of Genetic Determinism”, 
Studies in
History and Philosophy of Science Part C: Studies in History and
Philosophy of Biological and Biomedical Sciences
, 62: 1–9.
doi:10.1016/j.shpsc.2017.01.001


Estany, Ana y Sergio Martínez, 2014,
“«Scaffolding» and «Affordance» as
Integrative Concepts in the Cognitive Sciences”,

Philosophical Psychology
, 27(1): 98–111.
doi:10.1080/09515089.2013.828569


Estrada, Amadeo, Edna Suárez-Díaz, and Arturo
Becerra, 2022. “Reconstructing the Last Common Ancestor:
Epistemological and Empirical Challenges”, 
Acta
Biotheoretica
, 70: #15. doi:10.1007/s10441-022-09439-1


Estrada-González, Luis, 2011, “On the Meaning of
Connectives (Apropos of a Non-Necessitarianist Challenge)”,

Logica Universalis
, 5(1):115–126.
doi:10.1007/s11787-011-0025-6


–––, 2013, “Models of Possibilism and
Trivialism”, 
Logic and Logical Philosophy
, 21(2):
175–205. doi:10.12775/LLP.2012.010


–––, 2017, “Impossible Worlds and the
Intensional Sense of ‘and’”, 
Argumenta
,
2(2): 227–239. doi: 10.23811/43.arg2017.gon


–––, 2023, “An Easy Road to
Multi-contra-classicality”, 
Erkenntnis
, 88(6):
2591–2608. doi:10.1007/s10670-021-00468-9


Estrada-González, Luis and Claudia Lucía
Tanús-Pimentel, 2021, “Variable Sharing in Connexive
Logic”, 
Journal of Philosophical Logic
, 50(6):
1377–1388. doi: 10.1007/s10992-021-09602-y


Evans, James and Christián Carlos Carman, 2019,
“Babylonian Solar Theory on the Antikythera Mechanism”,

Archive for History of Exact Sciences
, 73(6): 619–659.
doi:10.1007/s00407-019-00237-9.


Evans, James, Christián Carlos Carman, and Alan S.
Thorndike, 2010, “Solar Anomaly and Planetary Displays in the
Antikythera Mechanism”, 
Journal for the History of
Astronomy
, 41(1): 1–39. doi:10.1177/002182861004100101


Fernández-Pinto, Manuela, 2015a, “Tensions in
Agnotology: Normativity in the Studies of Commercially Driven
Ignorance”, 
Social Studies of Science
, 45(2):
294–315. doi:10.1177/0306312714565491


–––, 2015b, “Commercialization and the
Limits of Well-Ordered Science”, 
Perspectives on
Science
, 23(2): 173–191. doi:10.1162/POSC_a_00166


–––, 2017, “To Know or Better Not to:
Agnotology and the Social Construction of Ignorance in Commercially
Driven Research”, 
Science and Technology Studies
,
30(2): 53–72. doi:10.23987/sts.61030


–––, 2018, “Democratizing Strategies for
Industry-Funded Medical Research: A Cautionary Tale”,

Philosophy of Science
, 85(5): 882–894.
doi:10.1086/699720


–––, 2020a, “Open Science for private
Interests? How the Logic of Open Science Contributes to the
Commercialization of Research”, 
Frontiers in Research
Metrics and Analytics
, 5: 1–10.
doi:10.3389/frma.2020.588331


–––, 2020b, “Commercial Interests and the
Erosion of Trust in Science”, 
Philosophy of Science
,
87(5): 1003–1013. doi:10.1086/710521


–––, 2023, “Methodological and Cognitive
Biases in Science: Issues for Current Research and Ways to Counteract
Them”, 
Perspectives on Science
, 31(5): 535–554.
doi:10.1162/posc_a_00589


Ferreira, Tiago Alfredo S., Charbel N. El-Hani, and Waldomiro
José da Silva-Filho, 2016, “Knowledge, Belief, and
Science Education: A Contribution from the Epistemology of
Testimony”, 
Science & Education
, 25(7–8):
775–794. doi:10.1007/s11191-016-9834-6


Filomeno, Aldo, 2016, “Fundamentality, Effectiveness, and
Objectivity of Gauge Symmetries”, 
International Studies in
the Philosophy of Science
, 30 (1): 19–37,
doi:10.1080/02698595.2016.1240459


–––, 2019, “Stable Regularities without
Governing Laws?”, 
Studies in History and Philosophy of
Science Part B: Studies in History and Philosophy of Modern
Physics
, 66: 186–197. doi:10.1016/j.shpsb.2019.03.001


–––, 2021, “Are Non-Accidental
Regularities a Cosmic Coincidence? Revisiting a Central Threat to
Humean Laws”, 
Synthese
, 198(6): 5205–5227.
doi:10.1007/s11229-019-02397-1


–––, 2023, “On Metaphysics’
Independence from Truthmaking. Or, Why Humean Supervenience is
Compatible with the Growing Block Universe”,

Erkenntnis
, 88(4): 1467–1480.
doi:10.1007/s10670-021-00411-y


Fiore, Camillo and Lucas Rosenblatt, 2023, “Recapture
Results and Classical Logic”, 
Mind
, 132(527):
762–788. doi:10.1093/mind/fzad006


Flichman, Eduardo H., 1989, “The Causalist Program. Rational
or Irrational Persistence?”, 
Crítica: Revista
Hispanoamericana de Filosofía
, 21(62): 29–53.
doi:10.22201/iifs.18704905e.1989.713


–––, 1990, “A Crucial Distinction: Initial
Data and Law Application Instances”, 
Crítica: Revista
Hispanoamericana de Filosofía
, 22(66): 75–85.
doi:10.22201/iifs.18704905e.1990.777


–––, 1995, “Hard and Soft Accidental
Uniformities”, 
Philosophy of Science
, 62(1):
31–43. doi:10.1086/289837


–––, 2000, “Lewis’s Causation: A
Fatal Example. A Response to Dorothy Edgington, Helen Beebee and
Horacio Abeledo”, 
Crítica: Revista Hispanoamericana
de Filosofía
, 32(94): 89–125.
doi:10.22201/iifs.18704905e.2000.841


Folguera, Guillermo, Erica Carrizo, and Alicia Massarini, 2014,
“Análisis de los aspectos epistemológicos y
sociales presentes en el discurso tecno-científico referido a
los organismos genéticamente modificados (OGM) cultivados en la
Argentina”, 
Revista CTS
, 9(25): 91–119.
 [
Folguera, Carrizo, and Massarini 2014 available online
]


Folguera, Guillermo and Olimpia Lombardi, 2012, “The
Relationship between Microevolution and Macroevolution, and the
Structure of the Extended Synthesis”, 
History and Philosophy
of the Life Sciences
, 34(4): 539–559.


Fortin, Sebastian and Olimpia Lombardi, 2014, “Partial
Traces in Decoherence and in Interpretation: What Do Reduced States
Refer To?”, 
Foundations of Physics
, 44(4):
426–446. doi:10.1007/s10701-014-9791-3


–––, 2016, “A Top-down View of the
Classical Limit of Quantum Mechanics”, in 
Quantum Structural
Studies: Classical Emergence from the Quantum Level
, Ruth E
Kastner, Jasmina Jeknić-Dugić, and George Jaroszkiewicz
(eds.), Singapore: World Scientific, 435–468.
doi:10.1142/9781786341419_0014


–––, 2017, “Interpretation and
Decoherence: A Contribution to the Debate Vassallo & Esfeld Versus
Crull”, 
Foundations of Physics
, 47(11):
1423–1427. doi:10.1007/s10701-017-0121-4


–––, 2018, “Understanding Decoherence as
an Irreversible Process”, 
International Journal of Quantum
Foundations
, 4(4): 247–267.


Fortin, Sebastian, Olimpia Lombardi, and Juan Camilo
Martínez González, 2016, “Isomerism and
Decoherence”, 
Foundations of Chemistry
, 18(3):
225–240. doi:10.1007/s10698-016-9251-6


–––, 2017, “The Relationship between
Chemistry and Physics from the Perspective of Bohmian
Mechanics”, 
Foundations of Chemistry
, 19(1):
43–59. doi:10.1007/s10698-017-9277-4


–––, 2018, “A New Application of the
Modal-Hamiltonian Interpretation of Quantum Mechanics: The Problem of
Optical Isomerism”, 
Studies in History and Philosophy of
Science Part B: Studies in History and Philosophy of Modern
Physics
, 62: 123–135. doi:10.1016/j.shpsb.2017.06.008


–––, 2019, “The Correspondence Principle
and the Understanding of Decoherence”, 
Foundations of
Physics
, 49(12): 1372–1393. doi:
10.1007/s10701-019-00309-4


–––, 2020, “The Frauchiger-Renner
Argument: A New No-Go Result?”, 
Studies in History and
Philosophy of Science Part B: Studies in History and Philosophy of
Modern Physics
, 70: 1–7.
doi:10.1016/j.shpsb.2019.12.002


–––, 2021, “Is the Problem of Molecular
Structure Just the Quantum Measurement Problem?”,

Foundations of Chemistry
, 23(3): 379–395.
doi:10.1007/s10698-021-09402-x


–––, 2022, “Entanglement and
Indistinguishability in a Quantum Ontology of Properties”,

Studies in History and Philosophy of Science
, 91:
234–243. doi:10.1016/j.shpsa.2021.11.017


Fortin, Sebastian, Olimpia Lombardi, and Matías Pasqualini,
2022, “Relational Event-Time in Quantum Mechanics”,

Foundations of Physics
, 52(1): #10.
doi:10.1007/s10701-021-00528-8






Francese, Christian and Guillermo Folguera, 2018, “Saberes
simplificados, tecnociencia y omisión de riesgos. El caso de
los organismos genéticamente modificados”, 
RUNA,
Archivo para las Ciencias del Hombre
, 39(2): 5–27.
doi:10.34096/runa.v39i2.4251


Freire, Olival, Jr., 2015, 
The Quantum Dissidents: Rebuilding
the Foundations of Quantum Mechanics (1950–1990)
, Berlin
and Heidelberg: Springer. doi:10.1007/978-3-662-44662-1


French, Steven and Décio Krause, 1995, “Vague
Identity and Quantum Non-Individuality”, 
Analysis
,
55(1): 20–26. doi:10.1093/analys/55.1.20


–––, 1999, “The Logic of Quanta”, in

Conceptual Foundations of Quantum Field Theory
, Tian Yu Cao
(ed.), Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 324–342.
doi:10.1017/CBO9780511470813.027


–––, 2003, “Quantum Vagueness”,

Erkenntnis
, 59(1): 97–124.
doi:10.1023/A:1023921928559


–––, 2006, 
Identity in Physics: A
Historical, Philosophical, and Formal Analysis
, Oxford: Oxford
University Press. doi:10.1093/0199278245.001.0001


–––, 2010, “Remarks on the Theory of
Quasi-Sets”, 
Studia Logica
, 95(1–2):
101–124. doi:10.1007/s11225-010-9249-3


Freund, Max Alberto, 2001, “A Temporal Logic for
Sortals”, 
Studia Logica
, 69(3): 351–380.
doi:10.1023/A:1013840126121


–––, 2004, “A Modal Sortal Logic”,

Journal of Philosophical Logic
, 33(3): 237–260.
doi:10.1023/B:LOGI.0000031381.56344.a9


–––, 2007, “A Two Dimensional Tense-Modal
Sortal Logic”, 
Journal of Philosophical Logic
, 36(5):
571–598. doi:10.1007/s10992-007-9050-6


–––, 2015, “A Modal-Tense Sortal Logic
with Variable-Domain Second-Order Quantification”, 
The
Australasian Journal of Logic
, 12(1): art. 5.
doi:10.26686/ajl.v12i1.2084


Frondizi, Risieri, 1943, “Contemporary Argentine
Philosophy”, 
Philosophy and Phenomenological Research
,
4(2): 180–186. doi:10.2307/2103068


Fuentes Guillén, Elías, 2022, “Bolzano’s
Theory of 
meßbare Zahlen
: Insights and Uncertainties
Regarding the Number Continuum”, in 
Handbook of the History
and Philosophy of Mathematical Practice
, Bharath Sriraman (ed.),
Cham: Springer, 1–38. doi:10.1007/978-3-030-19071-2_96-2


–––, 2023, “Bolzano on Bolzano: A Hitherto
Unknown Announcement of Bolzano’s 
Beyträge
”,

History and Philosophy of Logic
, 44(4): 442–458.
doi:10.1080/01445340.2022.2147750


Fuentes Guillén, Elías and Davide Crippa, 2021,
“The 1804 Examination for the Chair of Elementary Mathematics at
the University of Prague”, 
Historia Mathematica
, 57:
24–54.e18. doi:10.1016/j.hm.2021.07.001


Fuentes Guillén, Elías and Carmen Martínez
Adame, 2020, “The Notion of Variable Quantities ω in
Bolzano’s Early Works”, 
Historia Mathematica
, 50:
25–49. doi:10.1016/j.hm.2019.07.002


Gambini, Rodolfo, Luis Pedro García Pintos, and Jorge
Pullin, 2010, “Undecidability and the Problem of Outcomes in
Quantum Measurements”, 
Foundations of Physics
, 40(1):
93–115. doi:10.1007/s10701-009-9376-8


–––, 2011, “An Axiomatic Formulation of
the Montevideo Interpretation of Quantum Mechanics”, 
Studies
in History and Philosophy of Science Part B: Studies in History and
Philosophy of Modern Physics
, 42(4): 256–263.
doi:10.1016/j.shpsb.2011.10.002


García, Claudia Lorena, 2007, “Cognitive Modularity,
Biological Modularity, and Evolvability”, 
Biological
Theory
, 2(1): 62–73. doi:10.1162/biot.2007.2.1.62


–––, 2010, “Functional Homology and
Functional Variation in Evolutionary Cognitive Science”,

Biological Theory
, 5(2): 124–135.
doi:10.1162/BIOT_a_00036


–––, 2015, “Computer Simulations and
Experiments: In Vivo-In Vitro Conditions in Biochemistry”,

Foundations of Chemistry
, 17(1): 49–65.
doi:10.1007/s10698-015-9215-2


García, Pío, 2008, “Discovery by Serendipity:
A New Context for an Old Riddle”, 
Foundations of
Chemistry
, 11(1): 33–42. doi:10.1007/s10698-008-9061-6


García, Rolando, 1981, 
Nature Pleads Not Guilty
,
Oxford: Pergamon Press.


––– (ed.), 1997, 
La Epistemología
Genética y la Ciencia Contemporánea
, Barcelona:
Gedisa


–––, 2000, 
El Conocimiento en
Construcción. De las Formulaciones de Jean Piaget a la
Teoría de los Sistemas Complejos
, Barcelona: Gedisa.


García Bacca, Juan David, 1941, 
Filosofía de las
Ciencias. Teoría de la Relatividad
, México:
Editorial Séneca.


–––, 1962, 
Filosofía de las Ciencias.
La Física
, Caracas: Instituto Pedagógico.


–––, 1963, 
Historia Filosófica de la
Ciencia
, México: Universidad Autónoma de
México.


–––, 1977, 
Teoría y Metateoría
de la Ciencia. Curso Sistemático. Vol. I: Teoría de la
Ciencia
, Caracas: Universidad Central de Venezuela.


–––, 1984, 
Teoría y Metateoría
de la Ciencia. Vol. II
, Caracas: Universidad Central de
Venezuela.


García-Deister, Vivette and Carlos
López-Beltrán, 2015, “País de
Gordos/País de Muertos : Obesity, Death and Nation in
Biomedical and Forensic Genetics in Mexico”, 
Social Studies
of Science
, 45(6): 797–815.
doi:10.1177/0306312715608449


García-Deister, Vivette and Lindsay A. Smith, 2020,
“Migrant Flows and Necro-Sovereignty: The Itineraries of Bodies,
Samples, and Data Across the US-Mexico Borderlands”,

BioSocieties
, 15: 420–437.
doi:10.1057/s41292-019-00166-4


García-Ramírez, Eduardo, 2011, “A Cognitive
Theory of Empty Names”, 
Review of Philosophy and
Psychology
, 2(4): 785–807.
doi:10.1007/s13164-011-0078-8


García-Ramírez, Eduardo and Marilyn Shatz, 2011,
“On Problems with Descriptivism: Psychological Assumptions and
Empirical Evidence”, 
Mind & Language
, 26(1):
53–77. doi:10.1111/j.1468-0017.2010.01410.x


Garcia Romano, Leticia, Maricel Occelli, and Agustín
Adúriz-Bravo, 2021, “School Scientific Argumentation
Enriched by Digital Technologies: Results With Pre- and In-Service
Science Teachers”, 
EURASIA Journal of Mathematics, Science
and Technology Education
, 17(7): #em1982.
doi:10.29333/ejmste/10990


García Sienra, Adolfo, 1988, “Axiomatic Foundations
of the Marxian Theory of Value”, 
Erkenntnis
 29(3):
299–341. doi: 10.1007/bf00183068


–––, 1989, “Open Problems in the
Foundations of Price Formation Dynamics”, 
Erkenntnis
,
30(1): 87–99. doi:10.1007/bf00184817


Gentile, Nélida, 2013, 
La Tesis de la
Inconmensurabilidad: A 50 Años de la Estructura de las
Revoluciones Científicas
, Buenos Aires: Editorial
Eudeba.


–––, 2019, “A Quasi-Regularist View of
Laws”, 
Principia: An International Journal of
Epistemology
, 23(3): 445–459.
doi:10.5007/1808-1711.2019v23n3p445


Gentile, Nélida and Susana Lucero, 2021, “On the
Explanatory Power of Dispositional Realism”, 
Journal for
General Philosophy of Science
, on line first.
doi:10.1007/s10838-020-09539-x


Gericke, Niklas M., Mariana Hagberg, Vanessa Carvalho dos Santos,
Leyla Mariane Joaquim, and Charbel N. El-Hani, 2014, “Conceptual
Variation or Incoherence? Textbook Discourse on Genes in Six
Countries”, 
Science & Education
, 23(2):
381–416. doi:10.1007/s11191-012-9499-8


Ginnobili, Santiago, 2016, “Missing Concepts in Natural
Selection Theory Reconstructions”, 
History and Philosophy of
the Life Sciences
, 38(3): art. 8.
doi:10.1007/s40656-016-0109-y


–––, 2022, “Darwinian functional
biology”, 
Theoria: An International Journal for Theory,
History and Foundations of Science
, 37(2): 233–255. doi:
10.1387/theoria.22645


–––, 2023a, “Darwinian Beauty”,

Manuscrito
, 46(4): 1–32.
doi:10.1590/0100-6045.2023.v46n4.sg


–––, 2023b, “Sexual Selection and the
Brotherhood of Humans: Does the Argument of 
The Descent of
Man
 Confirm The Sacred Cause Thesis?”, 
Principia
,
Vol. 27, nº2, pp. 335–361.
doi:10.5007/1808-1711.2023.e90604


Ginnobili, Santiago and Daniel Blanco, 2019,
“Wallace’s and Darwin’s Natural Selection
Theories”, 
Synthese
, 196(3): 991–1017.
doi:10.1007/s11229-017-1491-z


Giovannini, Eduardo N., 2016, “Bridging the Gap Between
Analytic and Synthetic Geometry: Hilbert’s Axiomatic
Approach”, 
Synthese
, 193(1): 31–70.
doi:10.1007/s11229-015-0743-z


Giovannini, Eduardo N., Edward H. Haeusler, Abel
Lassalle-Casanave, and Paulo A. S. Veloso, 2022, “De
Zolt’s Postulate: An Abstract Approach”, 
Review of
Symbolic Logic
, 15(1): 197–224.
doi:10.1017/s1755020319000339


Giovannini, Eduardo N. and Georg Schiemer, 2019, “What are
Implicit Definitions?”, 
Erkenntnis
, 86(6):
1661–1691. doi:10.1007/s10670-019-00176-5


Gómez, Ricardo Juan, 2002, “El mito de la neutralidad
valorativa de la economía neoliberal”, 
Energeia:
Revista Internacional de Filosofía y Epistemología de
las Ciencias
, 1(1): 32–51.
 [
Gómez 2002 available online
]


–––, 2003, “Filosofía posmoderna:
sobre muertes anunciadas y otros menesteres”, in 
El
Filosofar Hoy
, Oscar Nudler and Francisco Naishtat (eds.), Buenos
Aires: Biblos, 77–89.


–––, 2010, “What is that Thing Called
Philosophy of Technology?”, in 
History and Philosophy af
Science and Technology -Volume IV
, Pablo Lorenzano,
Hans-Jörg Rheinberger, Eduardo Ortiz, and Carlos Delfino Galles
(eds.), Oxford: Eolss Publishers, 47–81.


–––, 2012, “On Economics and the
Impossibility of Its Reduction to Physics”, in 
Perspectives
on Epistemology and Economics
, Andrés Lazzarini and Diego
Weisman (eds.), Buenos Aires: Universidad de Buenos Aires,
139-160.


–––, 2017a, “El fin de todos los fines.
¿Acaso no había llegado el Fin de la Historia?”,

Theorein. Revista de Ciencias Sociales
, 2(1): 73–94.
doi:10.26807/theorein.v2i1.8


–––, 2017b, “Tecnología y nueva
ética”, 
De Raíz Diversa. Revista Especializada
En Estudios Latinoamericanos
, 3(6): 115–136.
doi:10.22201/ppela.24487988e.2016.6.58428


Gómez-Salazar, Mónica, 2017,
“Onto-Epistemological Pluralism, Social Practices, Human Rights
And White Racism”, 
Cultura: International Journal of
Philosophy of Culture and Axiology
, 14(2): 89–106.
doi:10.3726/cul.2017.02.05


Gómez-Torrente, Mario, 1998, “Logical Truth and
Tarskian Logical Truth”, 
Synthese
, 117(3):
375–408. doi:10.1023/A:1005165824990


–––, 2000, “A Note on Formality and
Logical Consequence”, 
Journal of Philosophical Logic
,
29(5): 529–539. doi:10.1023/A:1026510905204


–––, 2002, “The Problem of Logical
Constants”, 
Bulletin of Symbolic Logic
, 8(1):
1–37. doi:10.2178/bsl/1182353851


–––, 2006 [2019], “Logical Truth”,
in 
The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy
, (Spring 2019),
Edward N. Zalta (ed.), URL =
 <
https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/spr2019/entries/logical-truth/
>


–––, 2008, “Are There
Model‐Theoretic Logical Truths That Are Not Logically
True?”, in 
New Essays on Tarski and Philosophy
, Douglas
Patterson (ed.), Oxford: Oxford University Press, 340–368.
doi:10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199296309.003.0013


–––, 2009, “Rereading Tarski on Logical
Consequence”, 
Review of Symbolic Logic
, 2(2):
249–297. doi:10.1017/s1755020309090200


–––, 2015, “On the Essence and Identity of
Numbers”, 
Theoria: An International Journal for Theory,
History and Foundations of Science
, 30(3): 317–329.
doi:10.1387/theoria.14099


–––, 2020, “Logical Form, Truth
Conditions, and Adequate Formalization”, 
Disputatio
,
12(58): 209–222. doi:10.2478/disp-2020-0010


–––, 2021, “The Problem of Logical
Constants and the Semantic Tradition: From Invariantist Views to a
Pragmatic Account”, in 
The Semantic Conception of Logic:
Essays on Consequence, Invariance, and Meaning
, Gil Sagi and Jack
Woods (eds.), Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 35–54.
doi:10.1017/9781108524919.003


González, Juan C., 2010, “On Pink Elephants, Floating
Daggers, and Other Philosophical Myths”, 
Phenomenology and
the Cognitive Sciences
, 9(2): 193–211.
doi:10.1007/s11097-010-9164-0


–––, 2013, “Interactive Fiat
Objects”, 
Review of Philosophy and Psychology
, 4(2):
205–217. doi:10.1007/s13164-012-0121-4


–––, 2016, “Blurring the Differences
Between the Dream, Perceptual and Hallucinatory Experiences is Not the
Answer”, 
Constructivist Foundations
, 11(2):
417–419.
 [
González 2016 available online
]


González, Juan C., Paul Bach-y-Rita, and Steven J. Haase,
2005, “Perceptual Recalibration in Sensory Substitution and
Perceptual Modification”, 
Pragmatics & Cognition
,
13(3): 481–500. doi:10.1075/pc.13.3.05gon


González, Maria Eunice Quilici, 2005, “Information
and Mechanical Models of Intelligence: What Can We Learn from
Cognitive Science?”, 
Pragmatics & Cognition
, 13(3):
565–582. doi:10.1075/pc.13.3.09qui


González, Maria Eunice Quilici, Mariana Claudia Broens, and
Fabricio Loffredo D’Ottaviano, 2007, “Abductive Reasoning,
Information, and Mechanical Systems”, in 
Model-Based
Reasoning in Science, Technology, and Medicine
, Lorenzo Magnani
and Ping Li (eds.), (Studies in Computational Intelligence, 64),
Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 91–102.
doi:10.1007/978-3-540-71986-1_4


González, Maria Eunice Quilici and Osvaldo Pessoa, Jr,
2008, “Emergence of Autonomy in Contemporary Artificial Agents:
Any Novelty?” 
Cybernetics & Human Knowing
,
15(3–4): 42–49.


González Valerio, María Antonia and Polona Tratnik,
2023, 
Through the Scope of Life. Art and (Bio)Technologies
Philosophically Revisited
, Cham: Springer.
doi:10.1007/978-3-031-31736-1


Granger, Gilles Gaston, 1955, 
Lógica e Filosofia das
Ciências
, São Paulo: Edições
Melhoramentos.


Griffiths, Robert B., 2015, “Consistent Quantum
Measurements”, 
Studies in History and Philosophy of Science
Part B: Studies in History and Philosophy of Modern Physics
, 52:
188–197. doi:10.1016/j.shpsb.2015.07.002


Guerrero Pino, Germán, 2003, 
Estudios Kuhnianos
,
Santiago de Cali: Universidad del Valle.


–––, 2008, “Individuación de las
teorías en el enfoque semántico”, 
Principia:
An International Journal of Epistemology
, 12(1): 97–119.
doi:10.5007/1808-1711.2008v12n1p97


–––, 2010, “La Noción de Modelo en
el Enfoque Semántico de las Teorías”, 
Praxis
Filosófica
, 31: 169–185.
doi:10.25100/pfilosofica.v0i31.3434


Guillaumin, Godfrey, 2005, 
El Surgimiento de la Noción
de Evidencia. Un Estudio de Epistemología Histórica
sobre la Idea de Evidencia Científica
, Mexico D.F.:
UNAM.


–––, 2017, “Scientific Measurement as
Cognitive Integration: The Role of Cognitive Integration in the Growth
of Scientific Knowledge”, in 
Reasoning in Measurement
,
Nicola Mössner and Alfred Nordmann (eds.), London: Routledge,
189–202. doi:10.4324/9781781448717


Harding, Sandra, Tania Pérez-Bustos, and Manuela
Fernández-Pinto, 2019, “Entangled Sciences of Gender,
Sexuality and Race: Latin American Issues”, 
Tapuya: Latin
American Science, Technology and Society
, 2(1): 335–339.
doi:10.1080/25729861.2019.1685754


Haselager, Willem and Maria Eunice Q. González 2007a,
“The Meaningful Body: on Differences Between Artificial and
Organic Creatures”, in 
Artificial Cognition Systems
,
Angelo Loula, Ricardo Gudwin, and João Queiroz (eds.), Hershey:
Idea Group Publishers, 238–250.


–––, 2007b, “Mechanicism and Autonomy:
What Can Robotics Teach Us about Human Cognition and Action?”,

Pragmatics & Cognition
, 15(3): 407–412.
doi:10.1075/pc.15.3.02has


Hettema, Hinne, 2012, 
Reducing Chemistry to Physics. Limits,
Models, Consequences
, Groningen: Rijksuniversiteit
Groningen.


–––, 2014, “Linking Chemistry with
Physics: A Reply to Lombardi”, 
Foundations of
Chemistry
, 16(3): 193–200.
doi:10.1007/s10698-014-9200-1


Hilb, C., 1994, “Equality and the Limit of Liberty”,
in 
The Making of Political Identities
, Ernesto Laclau (ed),
London: Verso, 103–114.


Holik, Federico, Juan Pablo Jorge, Décio Krause, and
Olimpia Lombardi, 2022, “Quasi-Set Theory: A Formal Approach to
a Quantum Ontology of Properties”, 
Synthese
, 200(5):
#401. doi:10.1007/s11229-022-03884-8


Hutto, Daniel D. and Glenda Satne, 2017, “Demystifying
Davidson: Radical Interpretation Meets Radical Enactivism”,

Argumenta
, 5(1): 127–144.
doi:10.14275/2465-2334/20175.HUT


Inêz, Tiago Guimarães, Breno Pascal de Lacerda Brito,
and Charbel N. El-Hani, 2023, “A Model for Teaching About the
Nature of Science in the Context of Biological Education”,

Science & Education
, 32(1): 231–276.
doi:10.1007/s11191-021-00285-0


Izquierdo-Aymerich, Mercè and Agustín
Adúriz-Bravo, 2003, “Epistemological Foundations of
School Science”, 
Science & Education
, 12(1):
27–43. doi:10.1023/A:1022698205904


–––, 2009, “Physical Construction of the
Chemical Atom: Is It Convenient to Go All the Way Back?”,

Science & Education
, 18(3–4): 443–455.
doi:10.1007/s11191-008-9156-4


Jaimes Arriaga, Jesus Alberto, Sebastian Fortin, and Olimpia
Lombardi, 2019, “A New Chapter in the Problem of the Reduction
of Chemistry to Physics: The Quantum Theory of Atoms in
Molecules”, 
Foundations of Chemistry
, 21(1):
125–136. doi:10.1007/s10698-018-09332-1


Jaramillo Uribe, Juan Manuel, 2009, “Estructuralismo
francés y estructuralismo metateórico”,

Discusiones Filosóficas
, 10(15): 23–50.


–––, 2014, “Realismo estructural y
estructuralismo metateórico”, 
Estudios de
Filosofía
, 50: 171–193.
doi:10.17533/udea.ef.21144


Jaramillo Uribe, Juan Manuel, Luz Marina Duque M., Omar
Díaz Saldaña, Germán Guerrero Pino, Luis Humberto
Hernández, Martín Johani Urquijo, and Adolfo León
Gómez, 1997, 
Thomas Kuhn
, Santiago de Cali:
Universidad del Valle.


Kalpokas, Daniel, 2019, “Perception: A Blind Spot in
Brandom’s Normative Pragmatics”, 
Disputatio.
Philosophical Research Bulletin
, 8(9): 237–258.
doi:10.5281/zenodo.3236910


–––, 2020a, “Perception as a Propositional
Attitude”, 
Theoria: An International Journal for Theory,
History and Foundations of Science
, 35(2): 155–174.
doi:10.1387/theoria.20574


–––, 2020b, “Two Versions of the
Conceptual Content of Experience”, 
International Journal of
Philosophical Studies
, 28(1): 36–55.
doi:10.1080/09672559.2019.1690542


–––, 2022a, “Perception as a Contentful
Relation”, 
European Journal of Philosophy
, 30(2):
740–754. doi:10.1111/ejop.12688


–––, 2022b, “Brandom on Perceptual
Knowledge”, 
Journal of Transcendental Philosophy
, 3(1):
49–70. doi:10.1515/jtph-2021-0018


Kent, Michael, Vivette García-Deister, Carlos
López-Beltrán, Ricardo Ventura Santos, Ernesto
Schwartz-Marín, and Peter Wade, 2015, “Building the
Genomic Nation: ‘Homo Brasilis’ and the ‘Genoma
Mexicano’ in Comparative Cultural Perspective”, 
Social
Studies of Science
, 45(6): 839–861.
doi:10.1177/0306312715611262


Klier, Gabriela, Tomás Busan, Federico Di Pasquo, Paula
Blois, Christian Francese, and Guillermo Folguera, 2017,
“Natural Sciences and Environmental Issues: A Contribution from
the Philosophy of Environmental Sciences”, 
International
Journal of Environment and Health
, 8(4): 255–271.
doi:10.1504/IJENVH.2017.088112


Klimovsky, Gregorio, 1971, “Ciencia e
ideología”, 
Ciencia Nueva
, 10: 12–21. See
in
http://www.politicascti.net/images/ciencianueva/CIENCIANUEVA10.pdf


–––, 1994, 
Las Desventuras del Conocimiento
Científico. Una introducción a la
epistemología
, Buenos Aires: A-Z Editora.


–––, 2008, 
Mis Diversas Existencias. Apuntes
para una autobiografía
, Buenos Aires: A-Z Editora.


Klimovsky, Gregorio and Guillermo Boido, 2005, 
Las Desventuras
del Conocimiento Matemático
, Buenos Aires: A-Z
Editora.


Klimovsky, Gregorio and Cecilia Hidalgo, 1998, 
La Inexplicable
Sociedad
, Buenos Aires: A-Z Editora.


Klimovsky, Gregorio, Oscar Varsavsky, Jorge Schvarzer, Manuel
Sadosky, Conrado Eggers Lan, Thomas Moro Simpson, and Rolando
García, 1975, 
Ciencia e Ideología. Aportes
polémicos
, Buenos Aires: Ediciones Ciencia Nueva;
 
Klimovsky et al. 1975 available online
.


Knuuttila, Tarja and Vivette García Deister, 2019,
“Modelling Gene Regulation: (De)Compositional and Template-Based
Strategies”, 
Studies in History and Philosophy of Science
Part A
, 77: 101–111. doi:10.1016/j.shpsa.2017.11.002


Krause, Décio, 1991, “Multisets, Quasi-Sets and
Weyl’s Aggregates”, 
The Journal of Non-Classical
Logic
, 8(2): 9–39.


–––, 1992, “On a Quasi-Set Theory”,

Notre Dame Journal of Formal Logic
, 33(3): 402–411.
doi:10.1305/ndjfl/1093634404


–––, 1996a, “Remarks on Individuation,
Quantum Objects and Logic”, 
Logique et Analyse
,
39(155–156): 325–333.


–––, 1996b, “Axioms for Collections of
Indistinguishable Objects”, 
Logique et Analyse
,
39(153–154): 69–93.


–––, 2000, “Remarks on Quantum
Ontology”, 
Synthese
, 125(1/2): 155–167.
doi:10.1023/A:1005235125284


–––, 2022, “Quantifying Over
Indiscernibles”, 
Axiomathes
, 32(3): 931–946.
doi:10.1007/s10516-022-09646-y


–––, 2023, “On Identity, Indiscernibility
and (Non-)Individuality in the Quantum Domain”,

Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A
, 381(2255):
#20220096. doi:10.1098/rsta.2022.0096


Krause, Décio and Jonas R. Becker Arenhart, 2012, “A
Discussion on Quantum Non-Individuality”, 
Journal of Applied
Non-Classical Logics
, 22(1–2): 105–124.
doi:10.1080/11663081.2012.682447


–––, 2014, “Separability and
Non-Individuality: Is It Possible to Conciliate (at Least a Form of)
Einstein’s Realism with Quantum Mechanics?”,

Foundations of Physics
, 44(12): 1269–1288.
doi:10.1007/s10701-014-9808-y


–––, 2016a, “Individuality, Quantum
Physics, and a Metaphysics of Nonindividuals”, in

Individuals Across the Sciences
, Alexandre Guay and Thomas
Pradeu (eds.), Oxford: Oxford University Press, 61–82.
doi:10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199382514.003.0005


–––, 2016b, 
The Logical Foundations of
Scientific Theories: Languages, Structures, and Models
, London:
Routledge.


Krause, Décio, Jonas Becker Arenhart, and Otávio
Bueno, 2022, “The Non-Individuals Interpretation of Quantum
Mechanics”, in 
The Oxford Handbook of the History of Quantum
Interpretations
, Olival Freire Jr (ed.), Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 1135–1154.
doi:10.1093/oxfordhb/9780198844495.013.0047


Krause, Décio and Steven French, 1995, “A Formal
Framework for Quantum Non-Individuality”, 
Synthese
,
102(1): 195–214. doi:10.1007/BF01063905


–––, 2007, “Quantum Sortal
Predicates”, 
Synthese
, 154(3): 417–430.
doi:10.1007/s11229-006-9127-8


Krause, Décio, Adonai S. Sant’Anna, and A. G. Volkov,
1999, “Quasi-Set Theory for Bosons and Fermions: Quantum
Distributions”, 
Foundations of Physics Letters
, 12(1):
51–66. doi:10.1023/A:1021678721611


Kreimer, Pablo and Hebe Vessuri, 2018, “Latin American
Science, Technology, and Society: A Historical and Reflexive
Approach”, 
Tapuya: Latin American Science, Technology and
Society
, 1(1): 17–37.
doi:10.1080/25729861.2017.1368622


Kuechle, Graciela and Diego Ríos, 2015,
“Optimization-Based Explanations”, 
Philosophy of the
Social Sciences
, 45(4–5): 481–496.
doi:10.1177/0048393115586999


Labarca, Martín and Olimpia Lombardi, 2010, “Why
Orbitals Do Not Exist?”, 
Foundations of Chemistry
,
12(2): 149–157. doi:10.1007/s10698-010-9086-5


Lacey, Hugh and Pablo Rubén Mariconda, 2012, “The
Eagle and the Starlings: Galileo’s Argument for the Autonomy of
Science–How Pertinent Is It Today?”, 
Studies in
History and Philosophy of Science Part A
, 43(1): 122–131.
doi:10.1016/j.shpsa.2011.10.012


–––, 2014a, “O modelo das
interações entre as atividades científicas e os
valores”, 
Scientiae Studia
, 12(4): 643–668.
doi:10.1590/S1678-31662014000500002


–––, 2014b, “O modelo da
interação entre as atividades científicas e os
valores na interpretação das práticas
científicas contemporâneas”, 
Estudos
Avançados
, 28(82): 181–199.
doi:10.1590/S0103-40142014000300012


–––, 2023, “Commercially-Oriented
Technoscience and the Need for Multi-Strategic Research”, in

Portuguese Philosophy of Technology. Legacies and Contemporary
Work from the Portuguese-Speaking Community
, Helena Mateus
Jerónimo (ed.), Cham: Springer, 221–336.
doi:10.1007/978-3-031-14630-5_18


La Greca, María Inés, 2023, “The Other Side of
The Linguistic Turn: Theory of History and the Negotiation of
Humanity”, 
Rethinking History
, 27(1): 3–25. doi:
10.1080/13642529.2022.2143672


Laspra, Belén and José Antonio López Cerezo
(eds.), 2018, 
Spanish Philosophy of Technology: Contemporary Work
from the Spanish Speaking Community
, (Philosophy of Engineering
and Technology 24), Cham: Springer International Publishing.
doi:10.1007/978-3-319-71958-0


Laureano-Cruces, Ana Lilia and Axel Arturo
Barceló-Aspeitia, 2003, “Formal Verification of
Multi-Agent Systems Behaviour Emerging from Cognitive Task
Analysis”, 
Journal of Experimental & Theoretical
Artificial Intelligence
, 15(4): 407–431.
doi:10.1080/0952813031000119719


Lawler, Diego, 2018, “Praxeology Approaches Technology: The
Ontology and Epistemology of Our Technological Practices”, in

Spanish Philosophy of Technology
, Belén Laspra and
Jose Antonio López Cerezo (eds.), 17–30.
doi:10.1007/978-3-319-71958-0_2


Lazzarini, Andrés and Diego Weisman (eds.), 2012,

Perspectives on Epistemology of Economics. Essays on Methodology
of Economics
, Buenos Aires: Facultad de Ciencias
Económicas.
 [
Lazzarini and Weisman (eds) 2012 available online
]


Leuschner, Anna and Manuela Fernández Pinto, 2021,
“How Dissent on Gender Bias in Academia Affects Science and
Society: Learning from the Case of Climate Change Denial”,

Philosophy of Science
, 88(4), 573–593.
doi:10.1086/713903


–––, 2022, “Exploring the limits of
dissent: the case of shooting bias”, 
Synthese
, 200
(4):1–19. doi:10.1007/s11229-022-03783-y


Lewis, David, 1973, 
Counterfactuals
, Oxford:
Blackwell.


Lewowicz, Lucía, 2004, “El carácter no
universal del lenguaje en las últimas obras de Kuhn”,

Análisis Filosófico
, 24(2): 195–214.


–––, 2005, 
Del Relativismo
Lingüístico al Relativismo Ontológico en el
último Kuhn
, Montevideo: Universidad de la
República.


–––, 2007, “Inconmensurabilidad y no
solapamiento. Una ambigüedad planteada a través del
concepto de categoría taxonómica en el último
Kuhn”, in Pablo Lorenzano and Hernán Miguel (eds.),

Filosofía e Historia de la Ciencia en el Cono Sur
,
Buenos Aires: CCC Educando, 293–300 .


Lewowicz, Lucía and Olimpia Lombardi, 2013, “Stuff
versus Individuals”, 
Foundations of Chemistry
, 15(1):
65–77. doi:10.1007/s10698-012-9152-2


Leyva, Gustavo, 2014, “Democracy in Latin America: An
Unfinished Project”, 
Journal of the British Society for
Phenomenology
, 45(1): 59–71.
doi:10.1080/00071773.2014.915643


Linares Salgado, Jorge Enrique, 2018, “The Promises of
Synthetic Biology: New Bioartefacts and Their Ethical and Societal
Consequences”, in 
Spanish Philosophy of Technology
,
Belén Laspra and Jose Antonio López Cerezo (eds.),
179–194. doi:10.1007/978-3-319-71958-0_13


–––, 2019, 
Adiós a la Naturaleza. La
Revolución Bio-artefactual
, Madrid: Plaza &
Valdés


Lombardi, Olimpia, 2004, “What Is Information?”,

Foundations of Science
, 9(2): 105–134.
doi:10.1023/B:FODA.0000025034.53313.7c


–––, 2005, “Dretske, Shannon’s
Theory and the Interpretation of Information”,

Synthese
, 144(1): 23–39.
doi:10.1007/s11229-005-9127-0


–––, 2012, “Prigogine and the Many Voices
of Nature”, 
Foundations of Chemistry
, 14(3):
205–219. doi:10.1007/s10698-011-9140-y


–––, 2013, “Book Review: Hinne Hettema:

Reducing Chemistry to Physics. Limits, Models, Consequences
,
Groningen: Rijksuniversiteit Groningen, Groningen, 2012”,

Hyle: International Journal for Philosophy of Chemistry
,
19(1): 135–137.
 [
Lombardi 2013 available online
]


–––, 2014a, “The Ontological Autonomy of
the Chemical World: Facing the Criticisms”, in 
Philosophy of
Chemistry: Growth of a New Discipline
, Eric Scerri and Lee
McIntyre (eds.), (Boston Studies in the Philosophy and History of
Science 306), Dordrecht: Springer Netherlands, 23–38.
doi:10.1007/978-94-017-9364-3_3


–––, 2014b, “Linking Chemistry with
Physics: Arguments and Counterarguments”, 
Foundations of
Chemistry
, 16(3): 181–192.
doi:10.1007/s10698-013-9197-x


–––, 2023a, “Pluralist Realism: Where
Onticity and Practice Meet”, in 
Practical realist philosophy
of science. Reflecting on Rein Vihalemm’s ideas
, Ave Mets,
Endla Lõhkivi, Jaana Eigi-Watkin, and Peeter Müürsepp
(eds.), Lanham (Maryland): Lexington Books, in press.


–––, 2023b,“A Kantian-Rooted Pluralist
Realism for Science”, in 
Current Debates in Philosophy of
Science: In Honor of Roberto Torretti
, Cristián Soto
(ed.), Synthese Library Series, Cham: Springer, 77–95.
doi:10.1007/978-3-031-32375-1_5


–––, 2023c, “ Not Individuals, Nor Even
Objects: On the Ontological Nature of Quantum Systems”, in

Non-Reflexive Logics, Non-Individuals, and the Philosophy of
Quantum Mechanics. Essays in Honour of the Philosophy of Décio
Krause
, Jonas Becker Arenhart and Raoni Wohnrath Arroyo (eds.),
Synthese Library Series, Cham: Springer, 45–77.
doi:10.1007/978-3-031-31840-5_4


–––, 2023d, “Entanglement and
Indistinguishability: Facing Some Challenges from a New
Perspective”, 
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal
Society A
, 381(2255): #20220101. doi:10.1098/rsta.2022.0101


Lombardi, Olimpia and Juan Sebastián Ardenghi, 2022,
“How Different Interpretations of Quantum Mechanics Can Enrich
Each Other: The Case of the Relational Quantum Mechanics and the
Modal-Hamiltonian Interpretation”, 
Foundations of
Physics
, 52(3): #64. doi:10.1007/s10701-022-00580-y


Lombardi, Olimpia, Juan Sebastián Ardenghi, Sebastian
Fortin, and Mario Castagnino, 2011, “Compatibility between
Environment-Induced Decoherence and the Modal-Hamiltonian
Interpretation of Quantum Mechanics”, 
Philosophy of
Science
, 78(5): 1024–1036. doi:10.1086/662253


Lombardi, Olimpia and Mario Castagnino, 2008, “A
Modal-Hamiltonian Interpretation of Quantum Mechanics”,

Studies in History and Philosophy of Science Part B: Studies in
History and Philosophy of Modern Physics
, 39(2): 380–443.
doi:10.1016/j.shpsb.2008.01.003


–––, 2010, “Matters Are Not so Clear on
the Physical Side”, 
Foundations of Chemistry
, 12(2):
159–166. doi:10.1007/s10698-010-9090-9


Lombardi, Olimpia, Mario Castagnino, and Juan Sebastián
Ardenghi, 2010, “The Modal-Hamiltonian Interpretation and the
Galilean Covariance of Quantum Mechanics”, 
Studies in
History and Philosophy of Science Part B: Studies in History and
Philosophy of Modern Physics
, 41(2): 93–103.
doi:10.1016/j.shpsb.2010.02.002


Lombardi, Olimpia and Dennis Dieks, 2016, “Particles in a
Quantum Ontology of Properties”, in 
Metaphysics in
Contemporary Physics
, Tomasz Bigaj and Christian Wüthrich
(eds.), Leiden: Brill-Rodopi, 123–143.
doi:10.1163/9789004310827_007


Lombardi, Olimpia, Sebastian Fortin, and Mario Castagnino, 2012,
“The Problem of Identifying the System and the Environment in
the Phenomenon of Decoherence”, in 
EPSA Philosophy of
Science: Amsterdam 2009
, Henk W. de Regt, Stephan Hartmann, and
Samir Okasha (eds.), Dordrecht: Springer Netherlands, 161–174.
doi:10.1007/978-94-007-2404-4_15


Lombardi, Olimpia, Sebastian Fortin, and Cristian López,
2015, “Measurement, Interpretation and Information”,

Entropy
, 17(12): 7310–7330. doi:10.3390/e17117310


–––, 2016, “Deflating the Deflationary
View of Information”, 
European Journal for Philosophy of
Science
, 6(2): 209–230. doi:10.1007/s13194-015-0128-7


Lombardi, Olimpia, Sebastian Fortin, and Leonardo Vanni, 2015,
“A Pluralist View about Information”, 
Philosophy of
Science
, 82(5): 1248–1259. doi:10.1086/683650


Lombardi, Olimpia, Federico Holik, and Leonardo Vanni, 2016a,
“What Is Shannon Information?”, 
Synthese
, 193(7):
1983–2012. doi:10.1007/s11229-015-0824-z


–––, 2016b, “What Is Quantum
Information?”, 
Studies in History and Philosophy of Science
Part B: Studies in History and Philosophy of Modern Physics
, 56:
17–26. doi:10.1016/j.shpsb.2016.10.001


Lombardi, Olimpia and Martín Labarca, 2005, “The
Ontological Autonomy of the Chemical World”, 
Foundations of
Chemistry
, 7(2): 125–148.
doi:10.1007/s10698-004-0980-6


–––, 2006, “The Ontological Autonomy of
the Chemical World: A Response to Needham”, 
Foundations of
Chemistry
, 8(1): 81–92. doi:10.1007/s10698-005-9004-4


Lombardi, Olimpia and Cristian López, 2018, “What
Does ‘Information’ Mean in Integrated Information
Theory?”, 
Entropy
, 20(12): 894–912.
doi:10.3390/e20120894


Lombardi, Olimpia and Chérif Matta, 2022,
“Coarse-graining and the Quantum Theory of Atoms in
Molecules”, in 
Philosophical Perspectives in Quantum
Chemistry
, Olimpia Lombardi, Juan Camilo Martínez
González, and Sebastian Fortin (eds.), Synthese Library Series,
Cham: Springer, 217–241. doi:10.1007/978-3-030-98373-4_10


Lombardi, Olimpia and Ana Rosa Pérez Ransanz, 2012, 
Los
Múltiples Mundos de la Ciencia. Un Realismo Pluralista y su
Aplicación a la Filosofía de la Física
,
México: UNAM-Siglo XXI.


López, Cristian, 2019, “Roads to the past: how to go
and not to go backward in time in quantum theories”,

European Journal for Philosophy of Science
, 9: art. 27.
doi:10.1007/s13194-019-0250-z


–––, 2021a, “Three Facets of Time-Reversal
Symmetry”, 
European Journal for Philosophy of Science
,
11(2): #51. doi:10.1007/s13194-021-00355-8


–––, 2021b, “The Physics and Philosophy of
Time Reversal in Standard Quantum Mechanics”, 
Synthese
,
199(5-6): 14267–14292. doi:10.1007/s11229-021-03420-0


–––, 2022a, “Time’s Direction and
Orthodox Quantum Mechanics: Time Symmetry and Measurement”,

Journal for General Philosophy of Science
, 53(4):
421–440. doi:10.1007/s10838-021-09582-2


–––, 2022b, “Spontaneous Collapse Theories
and Primitivism About Time’s Direction”. 
Foundations
of Physics
, 52(5): #112. doi:10.1007/s10701-022-00632-3


–––, 2023a, “The Metaphysical
Under-Determination of Time Reversal”, 
Synthese
,
201(1): #29. doi:10.1007/s11229-023-04039-z


–––, 2023b, “Should Physical Symmetries
Guide Metaphysics? Two Reasons Why They Should Maybe Not”,

European Journal for the Philosophy of Science
, 13(2): #23.
doi:10.1007/s13194-023-00525-w


López, Cristian and Michael Esfeld, 2023, “Humean
Time Reversal”. 
Synthese
, 202: #31.
doi:10.1007/s11229-023-04247-7


López, Cristian and Olimpia Lombardi, 2019, “No
Communication without Manipulation: A Causal-Deflationary View of
Information”, 
Studies in History and Philosophy of Science
Part A
, 73: 34–43. doi:10.1016/j.shpsa.2018.06.003


López Austin, Alfredo, 2005, 
El Modelo en la Ciencia y
la Cultura
, México D.F.: UNAM-Siglo XXI.


López-Beltrán, Carlos, 1994, “Forging
Heredity: From Metaphor to Cause, a Reification Story”,

Studies in History and Philosophy of Science Part A
, 25(2):
211–235. doi:10.1016/0039-3681(94)90028-0


–––, 2006, “Storytelling, Statistics and
Hereditary Thought: The Narrative Support of Early Statistics”,

Studies in History and Philosophy of Science Part C: Studies in
History and Philosophy of Biological and Biomedical Sciences
,
37(1): 41–58. doi:10.1016/j.shpsc.2005.12.003


Lorenzano, Pablo, 1998, “Sobre las leyes en la
biología”, 
Episteme (Porto Alegre)
, 3(7):
261–272.


–––, 2007, “Leyes fundamentales y leyes de
la biología”, 
Scientiae Studia
, 5(2):
185–214. doi:10.1590/S1678-31662007000200004


–––, 2013, “The Semantic Conception and
the Structuralist View of Theories: A Critique of Suppe’s
Criticisms”, 
Studies in History and Philosophy of Science
Part A
, 44(4): 600–607.
doi:10.1016/j.shpsa.2013.09.001


–––, 2014, “What Is the Status of the
Hardy-Weinberg Law within Population Genetics?”, in 
European
Philosophy of Science: Philosophy of Science in Europe and the
Viennese Heritage
, Maria Carla Galavotti, Elisabeth Nemeth, and
Friedrich Stadler (eds.), Cham: Springer International Publishing,
159–172. doi:10.1007/978-3-319-01899-7_11


–––, 2023a, “Paradigm”, in 
The
SAGE Encyclopedia of Theory in Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics
, James Mattingly (ed.), Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE
Publications, 633–638. doi: 10.4135/9781071872383.n145


–––, 2023b, “Philosophy of Biology in
Latin America”, 
The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy

(Fall 2023 Edition), Edward N. Zalta and Uri Nodelman (eds.), URL =
<https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/fall2023/entries/phil-bio-latin-america/>


Lorenzano, Pablo and José Díez, 2002, “La
concepción estructuralista en el contexto de la
filosofía de la ciencia del siglo XX”, in Pablo Lorenzano
and José Díez (eds.), 
Desarrollos Actuales de la
Metateoría Estructuralista: Problemas y Discusiones
,
Buenos Aires: Universidad Nacional de Quilmes, 13–78.


–––, 2022, “Scientific Explanation as
Ampliative, Specialized Embedding: The Case of Classical
Genetics”, 
Synthese
, 200(6): #510. doi:
10.1007/s11229-022-03983-6


Losada, Marcelo and Olimpia Lombardi, 2018, “Histories in
Quantum Mechanics: Distinguishing between Formalism and
Interpretation”, 
European Journal for Philosophy of
Science
, 8(3): 367–394. doi:10.1007/s13194-017-0197-x


Ludwig, David and Charbel El-Hani, 2020, “Philosophy of
Ethnobiology: Understanding Knowledge Integration and Its
Limitations”, 
Journal of Ethnobiology
, 40(1):
3–20. doi:10.2993/0278-0771-40.1.3


Lythgoe, Esteban, 2011, “Ricoeur’s Concept of
Testimony”, 
Analecta Hermeneutica
, 3: lythgoe.
 [
Lythgoe 2011 available online
]


–––, 2014, “Social Imagination, Abused
Memory, and the Political Place of History in Memory, History,
Forgetting”, 
Études Ricoeuriennes / Ricoeur
Studies
, 5(2): 35–47. doi:10.5195/ERRS.2014.249


Maffía, Diana H., 2001, “Conocimiento y
subjetividad”, in 
Ciencia y Género
, Eulalia
Pérez Sedeño and Paloma Alcalá Cortijo (eds.),
Madrid: Universidad Complutense, 329–333.


–––, 2005, “Conocimiento y
emoción”, 
Arbor: Ciencia Pensamiento y Cultura
,
181(716): 515–521. doi:10.3989/arbor.2005.i716.408


–––, 2006, “El vínculo
crítico entre género y ciencia”, 
Clepsydra:
Revista de Estudios de Género y Teoría Feminista
,
5: 37–57.


–––, 2007, “Epistemología
feminista: la subversión semiótica de las mujeres en la
ciencia”, 
Revista Venezolana de Estudios de la Mujer
,
12(28): 63–98.


Maltrana, Diego, 2015, “Symmetries as By-Products of
Conserved Quantities, 
Studies in History and Philosophy of Science
Part B: Studies in History and Philosophy of Modern Physics
, 52:
358–368. doi:10.1016/j.shpsb.2015.10.006


Maltrana, Diego, Manuel Herrera, and Federico Benitez, 2022,
“Einstein’s Theory of Theories and Mechanicism”,

International Studies in the Philosophy of Science
, 35(2):
153–170. doi:10.1080/02698595.2022.2130661


Maltrana, Diego and Nicolás Sepúlveda-Quiroz, 2022,
“The Heuristic Power of Theory Classification, the Case of
General Relativity” 
Foundations of Physics
, 52(4): #94.
doi:10.1007/s10701-022-00614-5


Manero, Jorge, 2019, “Imprints of the Underlying Structure
of Physical Theories”, 
Studies in History and Philosophy of
Science Part B: Studies in History and Philosophy of Modern
Physics
, 68: 71–89. doi:10.1016/j.shpsb.2019.06.005


–––, “Quantum Pointillism with Relational
Identity”, 
Synthese
, 199(3-4): 10639–10666.
doi:10.1007/s11229-021-03262-w


Marcos, Alfredo and Ana Rosa Pérez Ransanz, 2015, “La
Filosofía de la Ciencia en Iberoamérica en el Siglo
XX”, en 
Filosofía Iberoamericana del siglo XX.
Filosofía Teórica e Historia de la
Filosofía
, Reyes Mate, Osvaldo Guariglia, and León
Olivé (eds.), 
Enciclopedia Iberoamericana de
Filosofía
, Madrid: Trotta-CSIC, 171–230


Marcos, João, 2009, “What Is a Non-Truth-Functional
Logic?”, 
Studia Logica
, 92(2): 215–240.
doi:10.1007/s11225-009-9196-z


Mariconda, Pablo Rubén, 1999, “Galileu e a teoria das
marés”, 
Cadernos de História e Filosofia da
Ciência
, 9(1–2): 33–71.


–––, 2008, “
As Mecânicas
 de
Galileu: as máquinas simples e a perspectiva técnica
moderna”, 
Scientia Studia
, 6(4): 565–606.
doi:10.1590/S1678-31662008000400006


–––, 2014, “Technological Risks,
Transgenic Agriculture and Alternatives”, 
Scientiae
Studia
, 12(spe): 75–104.
doi:10.1590/S1678-31662014000400005


Marques, Beatriz Sorrentino and Osvaldo Frota Pessoa, 2017,
“Presuppositions about the Role of Consciousness in the Agent
Causation Conception of Agents and the Problem of the Disappearing
Agent”, 
Cognitive Systems Research
, 43: 45–52.
doi:10.1016/j.cogsys.2016.12.003


Martínez, Isabel C., Silvia A. Español, and Diana I.
Pérez, 2018, “The Interactive Origin and the Aesthetic
Modelling of Image-Schemas and Primary Metaphors”,

Integrative Psychological and Behavioral Science
, 52(4):
646–671. doi:10.1007/s12124-018-9432-z


Martínez, Maximiliano and Maurizio Esposito, 2014,
“Multilevel Causation and the Extended Synthesis”,

Biological Theory
, 9(2): 209–220.
doi:10.1007/s13752-014-0161-3


Martínez, Maximiliano and Andrés Moya, 2011,
“Natural Selection and Multi-Level Causation”,

Philosophy and Theory in Biology
, 3: art. 2.
doi:10.3998/ptb.6959004.0003.002


Martínez, Sergio F., 1990, “A Search for the Physical
Content of Luders’ Rule”, 
Synthese
, 82(1):
97–125. doi:10.1007/BF00413671


–––, 1991, “Lüders’s Rule as a
Description of Individual State Transformations”, 
Philosophy
of Science
, 58(3): 359–376. doi:10.1086/289622


–––, 1997, 
De los Efectos a las Causas
,
México D. F.: UNAM-Paidós.


–––, 2003, 
Geografía de las
Prácticas Científicas: Racionalidad, Heurística y
Normatividad
, México D.F.: UNAM.


–––, 2013, “Technological Scaffoldings for
the Evolution of Culture and Cognition”, in 
Developing
Scaffolds in Evolution, Culture, and Cognition
, Linnda R.
Caporael, James R. Griesemer, and William C. Wimsatt (eds.), Cambridge
MA: MIT Press, 249–264.
doi:10.7551/mitpress/9780262019552.003.0012


–––, 2019, “What is Innovation: New
Lessons from Biology”, 
Theoria: An International Journal for
Theory, History and Foundations of Science
, 34(3): 343–355.
doi:10.1387/theoria.18863


Martínez, Sergio and Natalia Carrillo, 2022, “The
Metaphoric Sources of Scientific Innovation”, in 
Metaphors
and Analogies in Sciences and Humanities
, Shyam Wuppuluri and A.
C. Grayling (eds.), Synthese Library Series, Cham: Springer,
33–47. doi:10.1007/978-3-030-90688-7_2


Martínez, Sergio and Xiang Huang, 2011, “Epistemic
Groundings of Abstraction and Their Cognitive Dimension”,

Philosophy of Science
, 78(3): 490–-511.
doi:10.1086/660305


Martínez González, Juan Camilo, 2020, “About
the Ontology of Quantum Chemistry”, 
Tópicos
, 58:
325–348. doi:10.21555/top.v0i58.1045


Martínez González, Juan Camilo, Sebastian Fortin,
and Olimpia Lombardi, 2019, “Why Molecular Structure Cannot Be
Strictly Reduced to Quantum Mechanics”, 
Foundations of
Chemistry
, 21(1): 31–45. doi:10.1007/s10698-018-9310-2


Martínez-Ordaz, María del Rosario, 2021, “The
Ignorance Behind Inconsistency Toleration”, 
Synthese
,
198(9): 8665–8686. doi:10.1007/s11229-020-02593-4


–––, 2022a, “A Methodological Shift in
Favor of (Some) Paraconsistency in the Sciences”, 
Logica
Universalis
, 16(1): 335–354.
doi:10.1007/s11787-022-00302-y


–––, 2022b, “Is There Anything Special
About the Ignorance Involved in Big Data Practices?”, in

Philosophy of Computing
, Björn Lundgren and Nancy
Abigail Nuñez Hernández (eds.), 
Philosophy of
Computing
. Cham: Springer, Cham, 113–140.
doi:10.1007/978-3-030-75267-5_4


–––, 2023, “Scientific Understanding
Through Big Data: From Ignorance to Insights to Understanding”,

Possibility Studies & Society
, 1(3): 279–299.
doi:10.1177/27538699231176523


Matta, Chérif, Olimpia Lombardi, and Jesús Jaimes
Arriaga, 2020, “Two-Step Emergence: The Quantum Theory of Atoms
in Molecules as a Bridge Between Quantum Mechanics and Molecular
Chemistry”, 
Foundations of Chemistry
, 22(1):
107–129. doi:10.1007/s10698-020-09352-w


Maudlin, Tim, Elías Okon, and Daniel Sudarsky, 2020,
“On the Status of Conservation Laws in Physics: Implications for
Semiclassical Gravity”, 
Studies in History and Philosophy of
Science Part B: Studies in History and Philosophy of Modern
Physics
, 69: 67–81. doi:10.1016/j.shpsb.2019.10.004


Mc Manus, Fabrizzio (now Siobhan) Guerrero, 2009, “Rational
Disagreements in Phylogenetics”, 
Acta Biotheoretica
,
57(1–2): 99–127. doi:10.1007/s10441-009-9072-2


–––, 2012, “Development and Mechanistic
Explanation”, 
Studies in History and Philosophy of Science
Part C: Studies in History and Philosophy of Biological and Biomedical
Sciences
, 43(2): 532–541.
doi:10.1016/j.shpsc.2011.12.001


–––, 2014, “Homosexuality, Homophobia, and
Biomedical Sciences in Twentieth Century Mexico”, 
Sexuality
& Culture
, 18(2): 235–256.
doi:10.1007/s12119-013-9193-2


–––, 2016, “Los géneros del saber:
feminismo analítico, filosofía de la ciencia y
conocimiento científico”, 
INTERdisciplina
, 4(8):
59–87. doi:10.22201/ceiich.24485705e.2016.8.54969


Mc Manus, Siobhan Guerrero, 2018, “Biological Explanations
and Their Limits: Paleoanthropology Among the Sciences”, in

Rethinking Human Evolution
, Jeffrey Schwartz (ed.),
Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press, 31–52.
doi:10.7551/mitpress/11032.003.0004


–––, 2019, “Transgenderism and
Transracialism: Ontological Contrasts between Gender and Race”,

Diánoia
, 64(82): 3–30.
doi:10.22201/iifs.18704913e.2019.82.1633


Melogno, Pablo, 2022, “From Externalism to Internalism: The
Historiographical Development of Thomas Kuhn”, 
Foundations
of Science
, 27(2): 371–385.
doi:10.1007/s10699-021-09801-5


Melogno, Pablo and Leandro Giri, 2023, “Towards a Genealogy
of Thomas Kuhn’s Semantics”, 
Perspectives on
Science
, 31(4): 385–404. doi:10.1162/posc_a_00591


Melogno, Pablo, Hernán Miguel, and Leandro Giri (eds.),
2022, 
Perspectives on Kuhn. Contemporary Approaches to the
Philosophy of Thomas Kuhn
, Cham: Springer.
doi:10.1007/978-3-031-16371-5


Mercado, Alexis, Karenia Córdova, and Hebe Vessuri, 2022,
“The Technology of Need: Technology of Sustainability?”,

Tapuya: Latin American Science, Technology and Society
, 5:
#041789. doi:10.1080/25729861.2022.2041789


Meyer, Lia Midori Nascimento, Gilberto Cafezeiro Bomfim, and
Charbel Niño El-Hani, 2013, “How to Understand the Gene
in the Twenty-First Century?”, 
Science & Education
,
22(2): 345–374. doi:10.1007/s11191-011-9390-z


Mikenberg, Irene, Newton C. A. da Costa, and Rolando Chuaqui,
1986, “Pragmatic Truth and Approximation to Truth”,

Journal of Symbolic Logic
, 51(1): 201–221.
doi:10.2307/2273956


Miró-Quesada, Francisco, 1954, 
Filosofía de las
Matemáticas
, Lima:UNMSM.


–––, 1962, 
Apuntes para una Teoría de
la Razón
, Lima: UNMSM.


–––, 2013, 
Esquema de una Teoría de
la Razón
, Lima: Universidad Ricardo Palmaem.


Montano, Ulianov, 2014, 
Explaining Beauty in Mathematics: An
Aesthetic Theory of Mathematics
, Synthese Library Series. Cham:
Springer. doi:10.1007/978-3-319-03452-2


Moreira-dos-Santos, Frederik and Charbel N. El-Hani, 2017,
“Belief, Knowledge and Understanding: How to Deal with the
Relations Between Different Cultural Perspectives in
Classrooms”, 
Science & Education
, 26(3–4):
215–245. doi:10.1007/s11191-017-9891-5


Moro, Rodrigo, Gustavo A. Bodanza, and Esteban Freidin, 2011,
“Sets or Frequencies? How to Help People Solve Conditional
Probability Problems”, 
Journal of Cognitive Psychology
,
23(7): 843–857. doi:10.1080/20445911.2011.579072


Mortari, Cezar A., 2007, “Restricted Classical Modal
Logics”, 
Logic Journal of IGPL
, 15(5–6):
741–757. doi:10.1093/jigpal/jzm046


Moulines, C. Ulises, 1982, 
Exploraciones
Metacientíficas
, Madrid: Alianza Editorial.


Muciño, Ricardo and Elías Okon, 2020,
“Wigner’s Convoluted Friends”, 
Studies in
History and Philosophy of Science Part B: Studies in History and
Philosophy of Modern Physics
, 72: 87–90.
doi:10.1016/j.shpsb.2020.07.001


Muciño, Ricardo, Elías Okon, and Daniel Sudarsky,
2022, “Assessing Relational Quantum Mechanics”,

Synthese
, 200(5), #399. doi:10.1007/s11229-022-03886-6


Mudrovcic, María Inés, 2013, “About Lost
Futures or the Political Heart of History”, 
Historein
,
14(1): 7–21. doi:10.12681/historein.228


–––, 2014, “Time, History, and Philosophy
of History”, 
Journal of the Philosophy of History
,
8(2): 217–242. doi:10.1163/18722636-12341272


–––, 2019, “The Politics of Time, The
Politics of History: Who Are My Contemporaries?”, 
Rethinking
History
, 23(4): 456–473,
doi:10.1080/13642529.2019.1677295


Munévar, Gonzalo, 1981, 
Radical Knowledge: A
Philosophical Inquiry into the Nature and Limits of Science
,
Indianapolis: Hackett Publishing.


–––, 1998, 
Evolution and the Naked Truth: A
Darwinian Approach to Philosophy
, Aldershot: Taylor and
Francis.


–––, 2006, 
Variaciones sobre Temas de
Feyerabend
, Cali: Programa Editorial Universidad del Valle.


Nachman, Robert G., 1977, “Positivism, Modernization, and
the Middle Class in Brazil”, 
The Hispanic American
Historical Review
, 57(1): 1–23. doi:10.2307/2513540


Naishtat, Francisco S., 2000, “Continuity of Political
Philosophy: War and Peace in Secularized Politics”,

Diogenes
, 48(192): 76–85.
doi:10.1177/039219210004819207


–––, 2010a, “Governance, Sovereignty and
Profane Hope in a Globalised Catastrophe-World”,

Diogenes
, 57(4): 46–55.
doi:10.1177/0392192112436455


–––, 2010b, “The Figures of Terror and the
Philosophical Debate on Modernity”, in 
Terror, Terrorism,
States and Societies. A Historical and Philosophical Perspective
,
Samir Kumar Das and Rada Iveković (eds.), New Delhi: Women
Unlimited, 284–294.


–––, 2011, “Global Justice and Politics:
on the Transition from the Normative to the Political Level”, in

The Borders of Justice
, Étienne Balibar, Sandra
Mezzadra, and Ranabir Samaddar (eds.), Philadelphia: Temple University
Press, 33–51.


–––, 2012, “The Problematic Reception of
Latin American Emancipation in Marx’a Historiography”, in

New Perspectives in Global History
, Daniel Brauer, Iwan
D’Aprile, Günther Lottes, and Concha Roldán (eds.),
Hannover: Wehrhahn Verlag, 49–64.


–––, 2018, “The Crisis of Historical Time
at the Beginning of the Twentieth Century: An Early Counterpoint
Between Benjamin and Heidegger as a Crucial Issue for Thinking
Modernity, Globalization and its Historical Space”, in

Philosophy of Globalization
, Concha Roldán, Daniel
Brauer, and Johannes Rohbeck (eds.), Berlin-Boston: De Gruyter,
435–448. doi:10.1515/9783110492415-032


Needham, Paul, 2006, “Ontological Reduction: A Comment on
Lombardi and Labarca”, 
Foundations of Chemistry
, 8(1):
73–80. doi:10.1007/s10698-005-9002-6


Nieto Olarte, Mauricio, 2000, 
Remedios para el Imperio:
Historia Natural y la Apropiación del Nuevo Mundo
,
Bogotá: Instituto Colombiano de Antropología e
Historia.


–––, 2007, 
Orden Natural y Orden Social:
Ciencia y Política en el Semanario del Nuevo Reino de
Granada
, Madrid: CSIC.


Nieves Delgado, Abigail, 2018, “Science, Politics and the
Production of Biological Knowledge: New Trends and Old
Challenges”, 
Journal for General Philosophy of Science
,
49(3): 467–473. doi:10.1007/s10838-018-9406-3


Nieves Delgado, Abigail, David Ludwig, and Charbel El-Hani, 2023,
“Pluralist Ethnobiology: Between Philosophical Reflection and
Transdisciplinary Action”, 
Journal of Ethnobiology
,
43(3): 1–7. doi:10.1177/02780771231194774


Nudler, Oscar, 1990, “On Conflicts and Metaphors: Toward an
Extended Rationality”, in 
Conflict: Human Needs Theory
,
John Burton (ed.), London: Palgrave Macmillan UK, 177–201.
doi:10.1007/978-1-349-21000-8_9


–––, 2002, “Campos controversiales y
progreso en filosofía”, 
Manuscrito: Revista
Internacional de Filosofia
, 25(2): 337–352.


–––, 2004, “Hacia un modelo de cambio
conceptual: espacios controversiales y refocalización”,

Revista de Filosofía
, 29(2): 7–19.


––– (ed.), 2011, 
Controversy Spaces. A Model
of Scientific and Philosophical Change
, Amsterdam-Philadelphia:
John Benjamin.


Nunes-Neto, Nei, Alvaro Moreno, and Charbel N. El-Hani, 2014,
“Function in Ecology: An Organizational Approach”,

Biology & Philosophy
, 29(1): 123–141.
doi:10.1007/s10539-013-9398-7


Núñez Jover, Jorge, 1985, 
Indagaciones
Metodológicas Acerca de las Revoluciones Científicas.
Filosofía y Ciencia
, La Habana: Editorial de Ciencias
Sociales.


–––, 1989, 
Interpretación
Teórica de la Ciencia
, La Habana: Editorial de Ciencias
Sociales.


Okon, Elias and Daniel Sudarsky, 2014a, “On the Consistency
of the Consistent Histories Approach to Quantum Mechanics”,

Foundations of Physics
, 44(1): 19–33.
doi:10.1007/s10701-013-9760-2


–––, 2014b, “Measurements According to
Consistent Histories”, 
Studies in History and Philosophy of
Science Part B: Studies in History and Philosophy of Modern
Physics
, 48: 7–12. doi:10.1016/j.shpsb.2014.08.011


–––, 2014c, “Benefits of Objective
Collapse Models for Cosmology and Quantum Gravity”,

Foundations of Physics
, 44(2): 114–143.
doi:10.1007/s10701-014-9772-6


–––, 2015a, “The Consistent Histories
Formalism and the Measurement Problem”, 
Studies in History
and Philosophy of Science Part B: Studies in History and Philosophy of
Modern Physics
, 52: 217–222.
doi:10.1016/j.shpsb.2015.07.008


–––, 2015b, “The Black Hole Information
Paradox and the Collapse of the Wave Function”, 
Foundations
of Physics
, 45(4): 461–470.
doi:10.1007/s10701-015-9877-6


–––, 2017, “Black Holes, Information Loss
and the Measurement Problem”, 
Foundations of Physics
,
47(1): 120–131. doi:10.1007/s10701-016-0048-1


–––, 2018a, “The Weight of Collapse:
Dynamical Reduction Models in General Relativistic Contexts”, in

Collapse of the Wave Function: Models, Ontology, Origin, and
Implications
, Shan Gao (ed.), Cambridge University Press,
312–345. doi:10.1017/9781316995457.018


–––, 2018b, “Losing Stuff Down a Black
Hole”, 
Foundations of Physics
, 48(4): 411–428.
doi:10.1007/s10701-018-0154-3


Oldofredi, Andrea and Cristian López, 2020, “On the
Classification Between y-Ontic and y-Epistemic Ontological
Models”, 
Foundations of Physics
, 50(11):
1315–1345. doi:10.1007/s10701-020-00377-x


Olivé, León, 1988 [1993], 
Conocimiento, Sociedad
y Realidad. Problemas del Análisis Social del Conocimiento y el
Realismo Científico
, México, D.F.: Fondo de Cultura
Económica. Translated as 
Knowledge, Society and Reality:
Problems of the Social Analysis of Knowledge and of Scientific
Realism
, David Sosa (trans.), Amsterdam: Rodopi, 1993.


–––, 2000, 
El Bien, el Mal y la
Razón: Facetas de la Ciencia y de la Tecnología
,
México: Paidós.


–––, 2007, 
La Ciencia y la Tecnología
en la Sociedad del Conocimiento: Ética, Política y
Epistemología
, México: Fondo de Cultura
Económica.


Orozco-Echeverri, Sergio, 2023, “Popular Science as
Knowledge: Early Modern Iberian-American 
Repertorios De Los
Tiempos
”, 
Galilaeana
, 20(1): 34–61.
doi:10.57617/gal-4


Orozco-Echeverri, Sergio and Sebastián Molina-Betancur,
2019, “José Celestino Mutis’ Appropriation of
Newton’s Experimental Physics in New Granada (1761-1808)”,

History of Science
, 57(3): 291–323.
doi:10.1177/0073275319827203


–––, 2021, “A 
Mestizo

Cosmographer in the New Kingdom of Granada: Astronomy and Chronology
in Sánchez de Cozar Guanientá’s Tratado
(c.1696)”, 
Annals of Science
, 78(3): 295–333,
doi:10.1080/00033790.2021.1944667


Ortiz-Revilla, Jairo, Agustín Adúriz-Bravo, and
Ileana M. Greca, 2020, “Framework for Epistemological Discussion
on Integrated STEM Education”, 
Science & Education
,
29(4): 857–880. doi:10.1007/s11191-020-00131-9


Osorio Marulanda, Carlos Augusto, 2018, “Philosophy of
Activism and Community Management in Water Systems”, in

Spanish Philosophy of Technology
, Belén Laspra and
Jose Antonio López Cerezo (eds.), 211–222.
doi:10.1007/978-3-319-71958-0_15


Otero, Mario H. (ed.), 1997, 
Kuhn Hoy
, Montevideo:
Universidad de la República.


Oyarzún R., Pablo, 2007, “Memory, Moment, and Tears:
A Speculative Approach to the Problem of Latin American
Singularities”, 
CR: The New Centennial Review
, 7(3):
1–20. doi:10.1353/ncr.0.0000


–––, 2012, “On the Concept of
Authority”, 
CR: The New Centennial Review
, 11(3):
225–252. doi:10.1353/ncr.2012.0017


–––, 2017, “Fear and Abyss: Two Figures of
Power”, 
CR: The New Centennial Review
, 17(3):
219–235.


Páez, Andrés, 2006, 
Explanations in K. An
Analysis of Explanation as a Belief Revision Operation
,
Oberhausen: Athena Verlag.


–––, 2009, “Artificial Explanations: The
Epistemological Interpretation of Explanation in AI”,

Synthese
, 170(1): 131–146.
doi:10.1007/s11229-008-9361-3


–––, 2019, “The Pragmatic Turn in
Explainable Artificial Intelligence (XAI)”, 
Minds &
Machines
, 29(3): 441–459.
doi:10.1007/s11023-019-09502-w


Palti, Elías José, 2004, “The ‘Return of
the Subject’ As a Historico-Intellectual Problem”,

History and Theory
, 43(1): 57–82.
doi:10.1111/j.1468-2303.2004.00265.x


–––, 2005, “On the Thesis of the Essential
Contestability of Concepts, and 19th Century Latin American
Intellectual History”, 
Redescriptions: Political Thought,
Conceptual History and Feminist Theory
, 9(1): 113–134.
doi:10.7227/R.9.1.7


–––, 2006, “The Problem of
‘Misplaced Ideas’ Revisited: Beyond the ‘History of
Ideas’ in Latin America”, 
Journal of the History of
Ideas
, 67(1): 149–179. doi:10.1353/jhi.2006.0009


–––, 2009, “Beyond Revisionism: The
Bicentennial of Independence, the Early Republican Experience, and
Intellectual History in Latin America”, 
Journal of the
History of Ideas
, 70(4): 593–614.
doi:10.1353/jhi.0.0058


–––, 2010, “From Ideas to Concepts to
Metaphors: The German Tradition of Intellectual History and the
Complex Fabric of Language”, 
History and Theory
, 49(2):
194–211. doi:10.1111/j.1468-2303.2010.00539.x


–––, 2014, “The ‘Theoretical
Revolution’ in Intellectual History: From the History of
Political Ideas to the History of Political Languages”,

History and Theory
, 53(3): 387–405.
doi:10.1111/hith.10719


–––, 2018, “Koselleck—Foucault: The
Birth and Death of Philosophy of History”, in 
Philosophy of
Globalization
, Concha Roldán, Daniel Brauer, and Johannes
Rohbeck (eds.), Berlin: De Gruyter, 409–422.
doi:10.1515/9783110492415-030


–––, 2021, “Deleuze’s Foucault: On
the Possibility of an Outside of Knowledge/Power”, 
History
and Theory, Studies in the Philosophy of History
, 60(4):
20–35. doi:10.1111/hith.12234


Parente, Diego, 2018, “Synthetic Life: Organisms, Machines,
and the Nature of Synthetic Biology Products”, in 
Spanish
Philosophy of Technology
, Belén Laspra and Jose Antonio
López Cerezo (eds.), 31–41.
doi:10.1007/978-3-319-71958-0_3


Pedace, Karina, Tomás Balmaceda, Diego Lawler, Diana I.
Pérez , and Maximiliano Zeller, 2020, “Natural Born
Transhumans”, 
Revista de Filosofia Aurora
, 32(55):
112–131. doi:10.7213/1980-5934.32.055.ds07


Pelegrin, Diego and Christián Carman, 2019,
“
Accurata delineatio motuum stellae Martis
: How
Accurate Is Kepler’s Pretzel Diagram?”, 
Isis
,
110(4): 726–741. doi:10.1086/706936


Pérez, Moira, 2023, “Contracting Imaginations: On the
Political and Hermeneutical Monopoly of Identity Politics”,

Dialectical Anthropology
, 47: 85–96. doi:
10.1007/s10624-023-09683-y


Pérez Ransanz, Ana Rosa, 1985, “El Concepto de
Teoría Empírica según van Fraassen”,

Crítica
, 17(51): 3–12 (English version:
13–19). doi:10.22201/iifs.18704905e.1985.578


–––, 1999, 
Kuhn y el Cambio
Científico
, México, D.F.: Fondo de Cultura
Económica. Reprinted in 2000 and 2012.


Pérez Ransanz, Ana Rosa and Cristina Di Gregori, 2012,
“Experience, Emotions and Creativity”, in 
The Paths of
Creation. Creativity in Science and Art
, Sixto Castro and Alfredo
Marcos (eds.), Berna: Peter Lang, 97–114.
doi:10.3726/978-3-0351-0307-6


Pérez Ransanz, Ana Rosa and Ambrosio Velasco Gómez
(eds.), 2011, 
Racionalidad en Ciencia y Tecnología. Nuevas
Perspectivas Iberoamericanas
, México D.F.: UNAM.


Pessoa Jr., Osvaldo, 1997, “Can the Decoherence Approach
Help to Solve the Measurement Problem?”, 
Synthese
,
113(3): 323–346. doi:10.1023/A:1004994303863


–––, 2005, “Towards a Modal Logical
Treatment of Quantum Physics”, 
Logic Journal of the
IGPL
, 13(1): 139–147. doi:10.1093/jigpal/jzi009


Piaget, Jean and Rolando García, 1971, 
Les Explications
Causales
, Paris: Presses Universitaires de France.


–––, 1983, 
Psychogenèse et Histoire
des Sciences
, Paris: Flammarion.


–––, 1987, 
Vers une Logique des
Significations
, Gêneve: Murionde Science Nouvelle.


Picollo, Lavinia María, 2013, “Yablo’s Paradox
in Second-Order Languages: Consistency and Unsatisfiability”,

Studia Logica
, 101(3): 601–617.
doi:10.1007/s11225-012-9399-6


Piscoya, Luis, 1993, 
Metapedagogía: un Análisis
de las Denominadas Ciencias de la Educación
, Lima:
Ediciones Episteme.


–––, 1995, 
Investigación
Científica y Educacional: un Enfoque
Epistemológico
, Lima: Amaru Editores.


Poliseli, Luana, Jeferson Coutinho, Blandina Viana, Federica
Russo, and Charbel N. El-Hani, 2022, “Philosophy of Science in
Practice in Ecological Model Building”, 
Biology &
Philosophy
, 37: #21. doi:10.1007/s10539-022-09851-4


Putnam, Hilary, 1981, 
Reason, Truth and History
,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
doi:10.1017/CBO9780511625398


–––, 1987, 
The Many Faces of Realism
,
The Paul Carus Lectures, LaSalle, IL: Open Court.


Queiroz, João, 2012, “Dicent Symbols in Non-Human
Semiotic Processes”, 
Biosemiotics
, 5(3): 319–329.
doi:10.1007/s12304-011-9138-9


Queiroz, João and Charbel Niño El-Hani, 2006,
“Towards a Multi-Level Approach to the Emergence of Meaning
Processes in Living Systems”, 
Acta Biotheoretica
,
54(3): 179–206. doi:10.1007/s10441-006-8177-0


Queiroz, João, Claus Emmeche, Kalevi Kull, and Charbel
El-Hani, 2011, “The Biosemiotic Approach in Biology: Theoretical
Bases and Applied Models”, in 
Information and Living
Systems: Philosophical and Scientific Perspectives
, George Terzis
and Robert Arp (eds.), Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press, 91–130.
doi:10.7551/mitpress/9780262201742.003.0005


Queiroz, João, Frederik Stjernfelt, and Charbel Niño
El-Hani, 2014, “Dicent Symbols and Proto-Propositions in
Biological Mimicry”, in 
Peirce and Biosemiotics: A Guess at
the Riddle of Life
, Vinicius Romanini and Eliseo Fernández
(eds.), (Biosemiotics 11), Dordrecht: Springer Netherlands,
199–213. doi:10.1007/978-94-007-7732-3_11


Quezada Pulido, Wilfredo, 2002, “Causalidad física:
procesos causales y cantidades conservadas”, 
Revista de
Filosofía
, 58: 79–99.


–––, 2007, “Causalidad por
manipulación y el problema del antropomorfismo”,

Cuadernos de Filosofía
, 25: 9–26.


Quintanilla Pérez-Wicht, Pablo, 2006, “La
recepción del positivismo en Latinoamérica”,

Logos Latinoamericano
, second series, 1(6): 65–76.
 [
Quintanilla 2006 available online
]


Rahman, Sahid and Walter A. Carnielli, 2000, “The Dialogical
Approach to Paraconsistency”, 
Synthese
, 125(1/2):
201–232. doi:10.1023/A:1005294523930


Ramírez Sánchez, José Carlos and Adolfo
García de la Sienra, 2020, “The Complicated Pairing
between Dynamic Systems Techniques and Economics”,

Investigación Económica
, 79(314): 28–50.
doi: 10.22201/fe.01851667p.2020.314.76042


Ratto, Adrián, 2018, “Where Is History Heading?
Concerning the Idea of Progress”, in 
Philosophy of
Globalization
, Concha Roldán, Daniel Brauer, and Johannes
Rohbeck (eds.), Berlin: De Gruyter, 423–434.
doi:10.1515/9783110492415-031


Recio, Gonzalo L. and Christián C. Carman, 2018, “On
the Equant Point for the Planets and the Moon”, 
Journal for
the History of Astronomy
, 49(4): 401–424.
doi:10.1177/0021828618809222


Restrepo, Guillermo, 2013, “To Mathematize, or Not to
Mathematize Chemistry”, 
Foundations of Chemistry
,
15(2): 185–197. doi:10.1007/s10698-013-9183-3


Restrepo, Guillermo and Leonardo Pachón, 2007,
“Mathematical Aspects of the Periodic Law”,

Foundations of Chemistry
, 9(2): 189–214.
doi:10.1007/s10698-006-9026-6


Restrepo, Guillermo and José L. Villaveces, 2011,
“Chemistry, a Lingua Philosophica”, 
Foundations of
Chemistry
, 13(3): 233–249.
doi:10.1007/s10698-011-9123-z


–––, 2012, “Mathematical Thinking in
Chemistry”, 
Hyle: International Journal for Philosophy of
Chemistry
, 18(1): 3–22.
 [
Restrepo and Villaveces 2012 available online
]


–––, 2013, “Discrete Mathematical
Chemistry: Social Aspects of Its Emergence and Reception”,

Hyle: International Journal for Philosophy of Chemistry
,
19(1): 19–33.
 [
Restrepo and Villaveces available online
]


Revel Chion, Andrea and Agustín Adúriz-Bravo, 2022,
“In Sickness and in Health”. 
Science &
Education
, 31: 269–291. doi:10.1007/s11191-021-00258-3


Rietti, Sara and Diana Maffía, 2005, “Género,
ciencia y ciudadanía”, 
Arbor: Ciencia Pensamiento y
Cultura
, 181(716): 539–544.
doi:10.3989/arbor.2005.i716.411


Rios, Diego, 2004, “Mechanistic Explanations in the Social
Sciences”, 
Current Sociology
, 52(1): 75–89.
doi:10.1177/0011392104039315


–––, 2005, “Social Complexity and the
Micro-Macro Link”, 
Current Sociology
, 53(5):
773–787. doi:10.1177/0011392105055018


–––, 2009, “Comment”, in

Philosophy of the Social Sciences
, Chrysostomos Mantzavinos
(ed.), Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 92–98.
doi:10.1017/CBO9780511812880.008


Ríos, Diego and Graciela Kuechle, 2022, “Multiple
Realization and Evolutionary Dynamics: A Fitness-Based Account”,

Australasian Journal of Philosophy
, 100(1): 149–164.
doi:10.1080/00048402.2020.1839920


Ríos Pozzi, Diego, 2007, “System’s Effects.
Some Comments on Methodological Individualism”,

L’Année sociologique
, 57(1): 63–82.
doi:10.3917/anso.071.0063


Robles, José A. and Laura Benítez (eds.), 2004,

La Filosofía Natural en los Pensadores de la
Modernidad
, México D.F.: UNAM.


Rodríguez Medina, Leandro, 2014, 
Centers and
Peripheries in Knowledge Production
, New York and London:
Routledge.


Rodríguez, Pablo and Javier Blanco, 2017,
“Organization and Information in Simondon’s Theory of
Individuation”, 
Culture and Organization
, 23(1):
34–43. doi:10.1080/14759551.2016.1240745


Roffé, Ariel Jonathan, 2019, “Drift as Constitutive:
Conclusions from a Formal Reconstruction of Population
Genetics”, 
History and Philosophy of the Life Sciences
,
41(4): #55. doi: 10.1007/s40656-019-0294-6


–––, 2020, “Dynamic Homology and
Circularity in Cladistic Analysis”, 
Biology &
Philosophy
, 35(1): #21. doi: 10.1007/s10539-020-9737-4


Roffé, Ariel Jonathan and Santiago Ginnobili, 2019,
“Optimality Models and the Propensity Interpretation of
Fitness”, 
Acta Biotheoretica
, 68(3): 367–385.
doi: 10.1007/s10441-019-09369-5


Roldán, Concha, 2018, “The Thinning and Deformation
of Ethical and Political Concepts in the Era of Globalization”,
in 
Philosophy of Globalization
, Concha Roldán, Daniel
Brauer, and Johannes Rohbeck (eds.), Berlin: De Gruyter,
109–122. doi:10.1515/9783110492415-009


Roldán, Concha, Daniel Brauer, and Johannes Rohbeck (eds.),
2018, 
Philosophy of Globalization
, Berlin: De Gruyter.
doi:10.1515/9783110492415


Romero-Maltrana, Diego, 2015, “Symmetries as By-Products of
Conserved Quantities”, 
Studies in History and Philosophy of
Science Part B: Studies in History and Philosophy of Modern
Physics
, 52: 358–368. doi:10.1016/j.shpsb.2015.10.006


Romero-Maltrana, Diego, Federico Benítez, and
Cristián Soto, 2018, “A Proposal for a Coherent Ontology
of Fundamental Entities”, 
Foundations of Science
,
23(4): 705–717. doi:10.1007/s10699-018-9548-0


Rosas, Alejandro, 2002, “Psychological and Evolutionary
Evidence for Altruism”, 
Biology & Philosophy
,
17(1): 93–107. doi:10.1023/A:1012967912103


–––, 2008a, “The Return of Reciprocity: A
Psychological Approach to the Evolution of Cooperation”,

Biology & Philosophy
, 23(4): 555–566.
doi:10.1007/s10539-007-9065-y


–––, 2008b, “Multilevel Selection and
Human Altruism”, 
Biology & Philosophy
, 23(2):
205–215. doi:10.1007/s10539-007-9083-9


–––, 2010, “Evolutionary Game Theory Meets
Social Science: Is There a Unifying Rule for Human
Cooperation?”, 
Journal of Theoretical Biology
, 264(2):
450–456. doi:10.1016/j.jtbi.2010.02.015


–––, 2012, “Towards a Unified Theory of
Reciprocity”, 
Behavioral and Brain Sciences
, 35(1):
36–37. doi:10.1017/S0140525X11001312


–––, 2021, “Against the Evolutionary
Debunking of Morality: Deconstructing a Philosophical Myth”, in

Empirically Engaged Evolutionary Ethics
, Helen de Cruz and
Johan de Smedt (eds.), Synthese Library Series, Cham: Springer,
135–150. doi:10.1007/978-3-030-68802-8_7


Rosas, Alejandro and Juan Pablo Bermúdez, 2018,
“Viewing Others as Equals: The Non-Cognitive Roots of Shared
Intentionality”, 
Review of Philosophy and Psychology
,
9(3): 485–502. doi:10.1007/s13164-018-0394-3


Rosas, Alejandro, Juan Pablo Bermúdez, and Antonio
Gutiérrez, 2018, “Is a Bad Will a Weak Will? Cognitive
Dispositions Modulate Folk Attributions of Weakness of Will”,

Philosophical Explorations
, 21(3): 350–363.
doi:10.1080/13869795.2018.1457709


Rosas, Alejandro and Michael Koenigs, 2014, “Beyond
‘Utilitarianism’: Maximizing the Clinical Impact of Moral
Judgment Research”, 
Social Neuroscience
, 9(6):
661–667. doi:10.1080/17470919.2014.937506


Rosas, Alejandro, Hugo Viciana, Esteban Caviedes, and Alejandra
Arciniegas, 2019, “Hot Utilitarianism and Cold Deontology:
Insights from a Response Patterns Approach to Sacrificial and Real
World Dilemmas”, 
Social Neuroscience
, 14(2):
125–135. doi:10.1080/17470919.2018.1464945


Rosenblatt, Lucas, 2021a, “Towards a Non-classical
Meta-theory for Substructural Approaches to Paradox”,

Journal of Philosophical Logic
, 50 (5): 1007–1055.
doi:10.1007/s10992-020-09589-y


–––, 2021b, “Classical Recapture and
Maximality”, 
Philosophical Studies
, 178(6):
1951–1970. doi:10.1007/s11098-020-01517-9


–––, 2022, “Should the Non‐Classical
Logician be Embarrassed”, 
Philosophy and Phenomenological
Research
, 104(2): 388–407. doi:10.1111/phpr.12770


–––, 2023, “Paradoxicality without
Paradox”, 
Erkenntnis
, 88(3): 1347–1366.
doi:10.1007/s10670-021-00405-w


Rosenblatt, Lucas and Camila Gallovich, 2022,
“Paradoxicality in Kripke’s theory of truth”,

Synthese
, 200(2): #71. doi:10.1007/s11229-022-03625-x


Rosenblatt, Lucas and Damián E. Szmuc, 2014, “On
Pathological Truths”, 
The Review of Symbolic Logic
,
7(4): 601–617. doi:10.1017/S1755020314000239


Sabato, Jorge (ed.), 1975, 
El Pensamiento Latinoamericano en
la Problemática
Ciencia-Tecnología-Desarrollo-Dependencia
, Buenos Aires:
Paidos. New edition in 2011, Buenos Aires: Ediciones Biblioteca
Nacional.


Salcedo-Gómez, Mariana and Claudia Lorena García,
2023, “Functional Systems as Explanatory Tools in
Psychiatry”, 
Philosophical Explorations
, on line first.
doi:10.1080/13869795.2023.2229858


Salmerón, Fernando, 1968, 
La Filosofía y las
Matemáticas
, Mexico D.F.: Ediciones Productividad.


Samaniego, Fernanda, 2013, “Causality and Intervention in
the Spin-Echo Experiments”, 
Theoria: An International
Journal for Theory, History and Foundations of Science
, 28(3):
477–497. doi:10.1387/theoria.6136


–––, 2014, “Causation and the
Interventionist Vector of Explanatory Depth”, in 
New
Advances in Causation, Agency and Moral Responsibility
, Fabio
Bacchini, Stefano Caputo, and Massimo Dell’Utri (eds.),
Newcastle upon Tyne: Cambridge Scholars Publishing, 1–17.


–––, 2015, “Manipulating Spins: Causality
and Decoherence”, in 
Recent Developments in the Philosophy
of Science: EPSA13 Helsinki
, Uskali Mäki, Ioannis Votsis,
Stéphanie Ruphy, and Gerhard Schurz (eds.), (European Studies
in Philosophy of Science 1), Cham: Springer International Publishing,
183–193. doi:10.1007/978-3-319-23015-3_14


–––, 2022, “Bi-Directionality in Causal
Relationships”, 
Theoria: An International Journal for
Theory, History and Foundations of Science
, 37(1): 103–109.
doi:10.1387/theoria.22695


Sandrone, Darío, Andrés Vaccari, and Diego Lawler,
2022, “The Centrality of the Machine in the Thought of Jacques
Lafitte”, 
Philosophy & Technology
, 35(2): #28.
doi:10.1007/s13347-022-00523-5


Sant’Anna, Adonai S. and Décio Krause, 1997,
“Indistinguishable Particles and Hidden Variables”,

Foundations of Physics Letters
, 10(5): 409–426.
doi:10.1007/BF02764019


Santos, Gil, Gabriel Vallejos, and Davide Vecchi, 2020, “A
Relational-Constructionist Account of Protein Macrostructure and
Function”, 
Foundations of Chemistry
, 22(3):
363–382. doi:10.1007/s10698-020-09373-5


Saritaş, Davut, Hasan Özcan, and Agustín
Adúriz-Bravo, 2021, “Observation and Inference in
Chemistry Teaching: a Model-Based Approach to the Integration of the
Macro and Submicro Levels”, 
Science & Education
,
30: 1289–1314. doi:10.1007/s11191-021-00216-z


Scarano, Eduardo R., 2012, “Economics as a Separate Science:
A Critical Review”, in 
Perspectives on Epistemology and
Economics
, Andrés Lazzarini and Diego Weisman (eds.),
Buenos Aires: Universidad de Buenos Aires, 73–98.


Schuster, Félix Gustavo, 1992, 
El Método en las
Ciencias Sociales
, Buenos Aires: Centro Editor de América
Latina.


Sebastián, Miguel Ángel, 2014, “Dreams: An
Empirical Way to Settle the Discussion between Cognitive and
Non-Cognitive Theories of Consciousness”, 
Synthese
,
191(2): 263–285. doi:10.1007/s11229-013-0385-y


Sebastián, Miguel Ángel and Marc Artiga, 2020,
“Can Informational Theories Account for
Metarepresentation?”, 
Topoi
, 39(1): 81-94.
doi:10.1007/s11245-017-9514-4


Sfara, Emiliano and Charbel El-Hani, 2023, “Ecosystem Health
and Malfunctions: An Organisational Perspective”, 
Biology
& Philosophy
, 38(5): #37. doi:10.1007/s10539-023-09927-9


Skidelsky, Liza, 2013, “Faculty of Language, Functional
Models, and Mechanisms”, 
Journal of Cognitive Science
,
14(2): 111–149.
 [
Skidelsky 2013 available online
]


Smith, Lindsay A. and Vivette García-Deister, 2021,
“Genetic Syncretism: Latin American Forensics and Global
Indigenous Organizing”, 
BioSocieties
, 16:
447–469. doi:10.1057/s41292-021-00263-3


Soler-Toscano, Fernando, Ángel Nepomuceno-Fernández,
and Atocha Aliseda-Llera, 2009, “Abduction via C -Tableaux and
δ-Resolution”, 
Journal of Applied Non-Classical
Logics
, 19(2): 211–225. doi:10.3166/jancl.19.211-225


Soto, Cristián, 2015, “The Current State of the
Metaphysics of Science Debate”, 
Philosophica
, 90(1):
23–60. doi:10.21825/philosophica.82121


–––, 2017, “Globally and Locally Applied
Naturalistic Metaphysics”, 
Manuscrito: International Journal
of Philosophy
, 40(3): 33–50.
doi:10.1590/0100-6045.2017.V40N3.CS


–––, 2019, “The Epistemic Indispensability
Argument”, 
Journal for General Philosophy of Science
,
50(1): 145–161. doi:10.1007/s10838-018-9437-9


–––, 2023a, “Roberto Torretti’s
Philosophy of Science”, in 
Current Debates in Philosophy of
Science: In Honor of Roberto Torretti
, Cristián Soto
(ed.), Synthese Library Series, Cham: Springer, 15–36.
doi:10.1007/978-3-031-32375-1_2


––– (ed.), 2023b, 
Current Debates in
Philosophy of Science: In Honor of Roberto Torretti
, Synthese
Library Series, Cham: Springer.


Soto, Cristián and Otávio Bueno, 2019, “A
Framework for an Inferential Conception of Physical Laws”,

Principia: An International Journal of Epistemology
, 23(3):
423–444. doi:10.5007/1808-1711.2019v23n3p423


Soto, Cristián and Diego Romero, 2020, “Local
Selective Realism: Shifting from Classical to Quantum
Electrodynamics”, 
Foundations of Science
, 25(4):
955–970. doi:10.1007/s10699-020-09663-3


Spehrs, Adriana, 2021, “Dispositional Realism, Conflicting
Models and Contrastive Explanation”, 
Journal for General
Philosophy of Science
, on line first.
doi:10.1007/s10838-020-09544-0


Suárez-Díaz, Edna, 2001, “Satellite-DNA: A
Case-Study for the Evolution of Experimental Techniques”,

Studies in History and Philosophy of Science Part C: Studies in
History and Philosophy of Biological and Biomedical Sciences
,
32(1): 31–57. doi:10.1016/s1369-8486(00)00026-1


–––, 2007, “The Rhetoric of Informational
Molecules: Authority and Promises in the Early Study of Molecular
Evolution”, 
Science in Context
, 20(4): 649–677.
doi:10.1017/S0269889707001482


–––, 2009, “Molecular Evolution: Concepts
and the Origin of Disciplines”, 
Studies in History and
Philosophy of Science Part C: Studies in History and Philosophy of
Biological and Biomedical Sciences
, 40(1): 43–53.
doi:10.1016/j.shpsc.2008.12.006


–––, 2010, “Making Room for New Faces:
Evolution, Genomics and the Growth of Bioinformatics”,

History and Philosophy of the Life Sciences
, 32(1):
65–89.


–––, 2013, “Variation, Differential
Reproduction and Oscillation: The Evolution of Nucleic Acid
Hybridization”, 
History and Philosophy of the Life
Sciences
, 35(1): 39–44.


–––, 2014a, “The Long and Winding Road of
Molecular Data in Phylogenetic Analysis”, 
Journal of the
History of Biology
, 47(3): 443–478.
doi:10.1007/s10739-013-9373-9


–––, 2014b, “Indigenous Populations in
Mexico: Medical Anthropology in the Work of Ruben Lisker in the
1960s”, 
Studies in History and Philosophy of Science Part C:
Studies in History and Philosophy of Biological and Biomedical
Sciences
, 47: 108–117. doi:10.1016/j.shpsc.2014.05.011


Suárez-Díaz, Edna and Victor H. Anaya-Muñoz,
2008, “History, Objectivity, and the Construction of Molecular
Phylogenies”, 
Studies in History and Philosophy of Science
Part C: Studies in History and Philosophy of Biological and Biomedical
Sciences
, 39(4): 451–468.
doi:10.1016/j.shpsc.2008.09.002


Suárez[-Díaz], Edna and Ana Barahona, 1996,
“The Experimental Roots of the Neutral Theory of Molecular
Evolution”, 
History and Philosophy of the Life
Sciences
, 18(1): 55–81.


Suárez Pascal, Carlos David, 2017, “Merging
Biological Metaphors. Creativity, Darwinism and Biosemiotics”,

Biosemiotics
, 10(3): 369–378.
doi:10.1007/s12304-017-9297-4


–––, 2021, “N. R. Hanson and von
Uexküll: A Biosemiotic and Evolutionary Account of
Theories”, 
Journal for General Philosophy of Science
,
52(2):247–261. doi:10.1007/s10838-021-09552-8


Taccetta, Natalia, 2021, “Disappearance and Archive Fevers
in Film: The Rewriting of History and Practical Uses of the
Past”, 
Rethinking History
, 27(1): 26–50. doi:
10.1080/13642529.2022.2144024


Tajer, Diego, 2020, “
LFIs
 and Methods of Classical
Recapture”, 
Logic Journal of the IGPL
, 28(5):
807–816. doi:10.1093/jigpal/jzy060


Teijeiro, Paula, 2020a, “Subvaluationism and Classical
Recapture”, 
Logic Journal of the IGPL
, 28(5):
832–844. doi:10.1093/jigpal/jzy062


–––, 2020b, “Not a Knot”,

Thought: A Journal of Philosophy
, 9(1): 14–24.
doi:10.1002/tht3.437


–––, 2021, “Vague Connectives”,

Philosophical Studies
, 180 (5-6): 1559–1578.
doi:10.1007/s11098-022-01817-2


Tohmé, Fernando, 2022, “Introduction to Abduction and
Economics”, in Lorenzo Magnani (ed.), 
Handbook of Abductive
Cognition
, Cham: Springer.
doi:10.1007/978-3-030-68436-5_87-1


Tohmé, Fernando, Gianluca Caterina, and Rocco Gangle, 2015,
“Abduction: A Categorical Characterization”, 
Journal
of Applied Logic
, 13(1): 78–90.
doi:10.1016/j.jal.2014.12.004


Tohmé, Fernando and Ricardo Crespo, 2013, “Abduction
in Economics: A Conceptual Framework and Its Model”,

Synthese
, 190(18): 4215–4237.
doi:10.1007/s11229-013-0268-2


Torrens, Erica and Ana Barahona, 2019, “Castes and Trees:
The Link Between European and Mexican Representations of Human
Taxonomy”, 
Philosophy, Theory and Practice in Biology
,
11: #19. doi:10.3998/ptpbio.16039257.0011.019


Torrens, Erica, Juan Manuel Rodríguez Caso, and Ana
Barahona, 2021, “The Teaching of Biological Evolution in Mexican
Socialist Textbooks in the 1930s”, 
Culture &
History
, 10(2): #e022. doi:10.3989/chdj.2021.022


Torres, Juan Manuel, 1997, “On the Limits of Enhancement in
Human Gene Transfer: Drawing the Line”, 
Journal of Medicine
and Philosophy
, 22(1): 43–53. doi:10.1093/jmp/22.1.43


–––, 2002, “The Importance of Genetic
Services for the Theory of Health: A Basis for an Integrating View of
Health”, 
Medicine, Health Care and Philosophy
, 5(1):
43–51. doi:10.1023/A:1014280007453


–––, 2006, “Genetic Tools, Kuhnean
Theoretical Shift and the Geneticization Process”, 
Medicine,
Health Care and Philosophy
, 9(1): 3–12.
doi:10.1007/s11019-005-8317-3


Torretti, Roberto, 1967 [2005], 
Manuel Kant. Estudio sobre los
Fundamentos de la Filosofía Crítica
, Santiago:
Ediciones de la Universidad de Chile. (Third revised edition,
Santiago: Ediciones Universidad Diego Portales, 2005).


–––, 1978, 
Philosophy of Geometry from
Riemann to Poincaré
, Dordrecht: Reidel (Corrected reprint,
1984). doi:10.1007/978-94-009-9909-1


–––, 1985, 
Relativity and Geometry
,
Oxford: Pergamon Press (Corrected reprint, New York: Dover,
1996).


–––, 1990, 
Creative Understanding:
Philosophical Reflections on Physics
, Chicago: The University of
Chicago Press.


–––, 1999, 
The Philosophy of Physics
,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
doi:10.1017/CBO9781139172981


–––, 2000, “‘Scientific
Realism’ and Scientific Practice”, in 
The Reality of
the Unobservable: Observability, Unobservability and Their Impact on
the Issue of Scientific Realism
, Evandro Agazzi and Massimo Pauri
(eds.), (Boston Studies in the Philosophy of Science 215), Dordrecht:
Springer Netherlands, 113–122. Reprinted in 2007 as “El
realismo científico y la ciencia como es”, in

Escritos Filosóficos 1986–2006
, Santiago de
Chile: Universidad Diego Portales, 75–98.
doi:10.1007/978-94-015-9391-5_6


–––, 2008, “Objectivity: A Kantian
Perspective”, 
Kant and Philosophy of Science Today
,
Michela Massimi (ed.), 
Royal Institute of Philosophy
Supplement
, 63: 81–94. doi:10.1017/S1358246108000052


Tossato, Claudemir Roque and Pablo Rubén Mariconda, 2010,
“O método da astronomia segundo Kepler”,

Scientiae Studia
, 8(3): 339–366.
doi:10.1590/S1678-31662010000300003


Tozzi, Verónica, 2009, “Figuring Malvinas War
Experience. Heuristic and History as An Unfulfilled Promise”, in

Re-Figuring Hayden White
, Frank Ankersmit, Ewa Domanska, and
Hans Kellner (eds.), Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press,
261–280.


–––, 2012a, “Pragmatist Contributions to a
New Philosophy of History”, 
Pragmatism Today
, 3(1):
121–131.


–––, 2012b, “The Epistemic and Moral Role
of Testimony”, 
History and Theory
, 51(1): 1–17.
doi:10.1111/j.1468-2303.2012.00609.x


–––, 2016, “Dewey, Mead, John Ford, and
the Writing of History: Pragmatist Contributions to
Narrativism”, 
European Journal of Pragmatism and American
Philosophy
, 8(2): 167–189. doi:10.4000/ejpap.641


–––, 2018, “A Pragmatist View on Two
Accounts of the Nature of Our ‘Connection’ with the Past:
Hayden White and David Carr Thirty Years Later”, 
Rethinking
History
, 22(1): 65–85.
doi:10.1080/13642529.2017.1423010


–––, 2021, “Narrativism”, in 
The
Routledge Companion to Historical Theory
, Chiel van den Akker
(ed.), London: Routledge, Chapter 8, doi: 10.4324/9780367821814


–––, 2023, “Historical Irrealism: Paul A.
Roth and the Epistemic Value of Narrative Explanation”,

Rethinking History
, 27(1): 144-157.
doi:10.1080/13642529.2022.2158647


Vaccari, Andrés Pablo, 2013, “Artifact Dualism,
Materiality, and the Hard Problem of Ontology: Some Critical Remarks
on the Dual Nature of Technical Artifacts Program”,

Philosophy & Technology
, 26(1): 7–29.
doi:10.1007/s13347-011-0059-y


–––, 2015, “Transhumanism and Human
Enhancement: A Post-mortem”, 
Bioethica Forum
, 8(1):
22–23. doi:10.24894/BF.2015.08006


–––, 2017, “Against Cognitive Artifacts:
Extended Cognition and the Problem of Defining
‘Artifact’”, 
Phenomenology and the Cognitive
Sciences
, 16(5): 879–892.
doi:10.1007/s11097-016-9484-9


–––, 2020, “Neosubstantivism As
Cosmotechnics”, 
Angelaki
, 25(4): 39–53.
doi:10.1080/0969725x.2020.1790834


–––, 2022, “Cosmotechnical Thought Between
Substantivism and the Empirical Turn”, 
Foundations of
Science
, 27(4): 1279–1284 (2022).
doi:10.1007/s10699-020-09754-1


van Fraassen, Bas C., 1985, “On the Question of
Identification of a Scientific Theory (A Reply to “van
Fraassen’s Concept of a Scientific Theory” by Pérez
Ransanz)”, 
Crítica
, 17(51): 21–25 (Spanish
version: 26–29). doi:10.22201/iifs.18704905e.1985.581


Varsavsky, Oscar, 1971, “Ideología y verdad”,

Ciencia Nueva
, 12: 44–47.


Vasquez, Emily Elizabeth and Vivette García Deister, 2019,
“Mexican Samples, Latino DNA: The Trajectory of a National
Genome in Transnational Science”, 
Engaging Science,
Technology, and Society
, 5: 107–134.
doi:10.17351/ests2019.199


Vega-Encabo, Jesús and Diego Lawler, 2014, “Creating
Artifactual Kinds”, in 
Artefact Kinds: Ontology and the
Human-Made World
, Maarten Franssen, Peter Kroes, Thomas A.C.
Reydon, and Pieter E. Vermaas (eds.), Cham: Springer International
Publishing, 105–124. doi:10.1007/978-3-319-00801-1_7


Velasco Gómez, Ambrosio (ed.), 1997, 
Racionalidad y
Cambio Científico
, México F. F.:
UNAM-Paidós.


–––, 2004, “Toward a Political Philosophy
of Science”, 
Philosophy Today
, 48 (Supplement):
116–121


–––, 2012, “Rationality in Science and the
Arts: Common Sense and Heuristics”, in 
The Paths of
Creation. Creativity in Science and Art
, Sixto Castro and Alfredo
Marcos (eds.), Berna: Peter Lang, 71–80.
doi:10.3726/978-3-0351-0307-6


–––, 2015a, “Rationality and
Method”, in 
The Routledge Companion to Hermeneutics
,
Jeff Malpas y Hans-Helmuth Gander (eds), London: Routledge,
251–266. doi:10.4324/9781315771854.ch19


–––, 2015b, “Ibero-American Republican
Humanism and the Intellectual Roots of Mexican Independence”, in

The Traditions of Liberty in the Atlantic World
, Francisco
Colom González and Angel Rivero (eds.), Leiden: Brill.
doi:10.1163/9789004299689_005


–––, 2023, “Situational analysis of
Scientific Traditions: Popper´s Hermeneutical and Political Turn
in Philosophy of Science”, 
Journal of Philosophical
Investigations
, 17(42): 127–139.
doi:10.22034/jpiut.2000.16577


Verdugo, Carlos, 2009, “Popper’s Thesis of the Unity
of Scientific Method: Method Versus Techniques”, in

Rethinking Popper
, Zuzana Parusniková and Robert S.
Cohen (eds.), (Boston Studies in The Philosophy of Science 272),
Dordrecht: Springer Netherlands, 155–160.
doi:10.1007/978-1-4020-9338-8_12


Vessuri, Hebe, 2000, “Mode 2 or the Emblematic
Disestablishment of Science: A View from the Edge”, 
Science,
Technology and Society
, 5(2): 195–207.
doi:10.1177/097172180000500204


–––, 2003, “Science, Politics, and
Democratic Participation in Policy-Making: A Latin American
View”, 
Technology in Society
, 25(2): 263–273.
doi:10.1016/S0160-791X(03)00020-4


–––, 2019, “Crises that Mismatch Canons in
Science: Provincialization, Transnationality, Conviviality?”,

Tapuya: Latin American Science, Technology and Society
, 2(1):
26–31. doi:10.1080/25729861.2019.1586193


Vessuri, Hebe and Leandro Rodríguez-Medina, 2022,
“Producing Knowledge in Latin America: Social Sciences Research
Assessment with a Geopolitical Perspective”, in 
Handbook on
Research Assessment in the Social Sciences
, Tim C. E. Engels
(ed.), Cheltenham: Edward Elgar Publishing, 472–490.
doi:10.4337/9781800372559.00039


Villani, Giovanni, Elena Ghibaudi, and Luigi Cerruti, 2018,
“The Orbital: A Pivotal Concept in the Relationship between
Chemistry and Physics? A Comment to the Work by Fortin and
Coauthors”, 
Foundations of Chemistry
, 20(2):
89–97. doi:10.1007/s10698-017-9293-4


Villoro, Luis, 1982, 
Creer, Saber, Conocer
, Mexico D.F.:
Siglo XXI.


Wade, Peter, Carlos López-Beltrán, Eduardo Restrepo,
and Ricardo Ventura Santos (eds.), 2014, 
Mestizo Genomics: Race
Mixture, Nation, and Science in Latin America
, Durham-London:
Duke University Press.


–––, 2015, “Genomic Research, Publics and
Experts in Latin America: Nation, Race and Body”, 
Social
Studies of Science
, 45(6): 775–796.
doi:10.1177/0306312715623108


Zambon, Alfio, 2018, “A Representation of the Periodic
System Based on Atomic-Number Triads”, 
Foundations of
Chemistry
, 20(1): 51–74. doi:10.1007/s10698-017-9297-0


–––, 2019, “Periodicity Trees in a
Secondary Criterion of Periodic Classification: Its Implications for
Science Teaching and Communication”, 
Substantia
, 3(2):
101–114. doi:10.13128/Substantia-502


–––, 2022, “Chemical Reactivity:
Cause-Effect or Interaction?”, 
Foundations of
Chemistry
, 24(3): 375–387.
doi:10.1007/s10698-022-09430-1


Zambon, Alfio and Mariana Córdoba, 2021,
“Nanomaterials and Intertheoretical Relations: Macro and
Nanochemistry as Emergent Levels”, 
Foundations of
Science
, 26(2): 355–370. doi:
10.1007/s10699-020-09723-8


Zea, Leopoldo, 1943–1944, 
El Positivismo en
México
, Vol. 1 (1943), Vol. 2 (1944), Mexico D.F.: Fondo
de Cultura Económica.








Academic Tools










How to cite this entry
.








Preview the PDF version of this entry
 at the
 
Friends of the SEP Society
.








Look up topics and thinkers related to this entry

 at the Internet Philosophy Ontology Project (InPhO).








Enhanced bibliography for this entry

at 
PhilPapers
, with links to its database.












Other Internet Resources




Instituto de Investigaciones Filosóficas UNAM (IIF)


Sociedad Argentina de Análisis Filosófico (SADAF)


Asociación de Filosofía e Historia de la Ciencia del Cono Sur (AFHIC)


Grupo de Filosofía de las Ciencias UBA (GFC)








Related Entries




epistemology: in Latin America
 |
 
feminist philosophy, approaches: Latin American feminism
 |
 
Latin American Philosophy
 |
 
Latin American Philosophy: analytic philosophy in
 |
 
Latin American Philosophy: metaphilosophical foundations
 |
 
liberation, philosophy of










 






Copyright © 2024
 by



Olimpia Lombardi
<
olimpiafilo
@
arnet
.
com
.
ar
>


Alberto Cordero

<
acordelec
@
outlook
.
com
>

Ana Rosa Pérez Ransanz
<
perezransanz
@
yahoo
.
com
>
    




 









  Open access to the SEP is made possible by a world-wide funding initiative.

  Please Read How You Can Help Support the Growth and Development of the Encyclopedia




 

