











 
 Entry Navigation 






Entry Contents


Bibliography


Academic Tools


Friends PDF Preview 


Author and Citation Info 
 


Back to Top 


























Progress
First published Thu Feb 17, 2011; substantive revision Wed Feb 28, 2024





The philosophical discourse on progress, both moral and political, has
a long history. It first rose to prominence in the Age of
Enlightenment as a particular view of history as progressive (see
entries on
 
Enlightenment

 and
 
philosophy of history
).
 Contrary to the view that history is a sequence of random events with
no particular trajectory or meaning, the Enlightenment view holds that
history has a 
tendency
 toward freedom. There are two major
ways to account for this tendency: one 
teleological
 and the
other 
non-teleological
. Crudely, the teleological account
argues that world history has its own end, and progress toward human
freedom is its manifestation. This account leaves little room for
human agency in advancing or obstructing progress, for progress is

inevitable
 by dint of the “law of history.” By
contrast, the non-teleological account argues that even though history
is open-ended, there is still a tendency toward freedom because of the
interplay of causal forces including human nature, rationality, and
institutions. On this account, progress is 
possible
. Section
1 of this entry gives an overview of these two Enlightenment accounts
of progress. 



The Enlightenment view of progress became less prominent in the
20
th
 century. As evolutionary sciences have matured, the
teleological account of human development has lost much of its appeal.
But even the non-teleological account has not stood the test of time.
The climate of optimism that shaped much of the Enlightenment thought
was replaced by a climate of despair. The belief that progress is
possible, let alone inevitable, came to seem naïve and false in
the face of world wars, colonial conquests, and environmental
degradation. New intellectual traditions such as critical theory,
moral relativism, postcolonialism, and postmodernism arose, critiquing
the metaphysical, epistemological, and empirical assumptions of the
Enlightenment view of progress as well as its normative risks (see
entries on
 
critical theory

 and
 
postmodernism
).
 Common to this critical literature is an alternative picture of
history that is contingent, if not tragic. This informs the belief
about the future that is at best 
indeterminate
. Section 3 of
the entry summarizes these critiques of progress.



Interestingly, the last decade has seen something of a revival of the
discourse of progress, especially in moral and political philosophy.
Much like its rise and fall, the ongoing resurgence of the discourse
of progress is prompted largely by the political currents of its time.
The 21
st
 century is widely felt to be another epoch of
social change. On the brighter side, social movements are winning
battles in human rights for previously marginalized groups and
individuals (e.g., people racialized as black, members of the LGBTQ2+
communities); on the darker side, illiberal populism is destabilizing
democracy and peace across the globe. If these patterns are not just
random shifts in states of affairs but instead are seen as
constituting either genuine moral improvements that need to be secured
and expanded or examples of moral decline that should be scrutinized
and halted, then in order to describe and evaluate these trends, it
would seem that we need a concept of progress after all. The
philosophical challenge is to avoid the pitfalls of the naïve
optimism of the Enlightenment and the undue skepticism of
postmodernism. Much of the new literature on progress is dedicated to
rescuing an idea of progress from the contingent view of human
development and carve out a meaningful, albeit limited, role for
reason, human agency, and institutional design to enable progress.
Section 2 of this entry summarizes recent philosophical efforts to
reconcile evolutionary sciences and empirical history with human
progress (moral and political), vindicating, refining, and challenging
the Enlightenment view of progress. An emerging consensus from the
contemporary discourse is a much more modest idea of progress that is

merely possible
, open-ended, local, and non-linear. 










1. The Enlightenment Discourse on Progress




1.1 Historical Context: The Rise of Modern Science


1.2 Metaphysics of History and Teleological Conceptions of Progress


1.3 Anthropology and Non-teleological Conceptions of Progress




2. Contemporary Views on Progress




2.1 Evolution and Non-teleological Conceptions of Progress


2.2 Moral Realism and Teleological Conceptions of Progress


2.3 Value Pluralism and Measures of Progress


2.4 The Role of Human Nature


2.5 The Role of Reason


2.6 The Role of Institutions




3. Critiques of Progress




3.1 Metaphysical Critiques from Critical Theory and Moral Relativism


3.2 Normative Critiques from Postmodernism and Postcolonialism




Bibliography


Academic Tools


Other Internet Resources


Related Entries












1. The Enlightenment Discourse on Progress



Today, the label “the Enlightenment conception of
progress” is often used to refer to the view of historical
progress that is teleological, linear, global, and rationalistic. This
view is commonly attributed to Immanuel Kant, G.W.F. Hegel, and Karl
Marx. But as we will see, these philosophers do not share one and the
same conception of progress; indeed, they differ fundamentally on the
nature and conditions of historical progress. What they really share
is the optimism of European Enlightenment about the upward development
of humanity as a whole. To understand “Enlightenment conceptions
of progress,” it is helpful to first take a brief look at the
historical context that shaped them.


1.1 Historical Context: The Rise of Modern Science



European Enlightenment was an intellectual and political development
that took place in the 17
th
 and 18
th
 centuries.
This was an era of progress, marked by major scientific revolutions
(see entry on
 
scientific progress
),
 technological innovations, economic growth, and the fall of absolute
monarchy and feudalism. Intellectuals at the time shared a sense of
optimism for the upward development of humanity as well as the
conviction that scientific inquiry was the driving force behind this
development.



Enlightenment thinkers almost uniformly rejected supernatural
explanations of historical phenomena, which were rather common prior
to the Enlightenment. For example, Plato (
Statesman
) and
Aristotle (
Meteorology
, 352a29–32;

Metaphysics
, 1074b9–13) appealed to myths to explain
the occurrences of natural disasters and the destruction of
civilizations by gods’ wills. Similarly, St. Augustine of Hippo,
in 
The City of God against the Pagans
, advanced a Christian
version of history, according to which progress is predestined for
God’s elect whereas the rest of humanity’s fate is
damnation. But as we will see shortly, notwithstanding the rejection
of supernaturalism, some Enlightenment thinkers brought in their own
teleology.



Two thinkers of the French Enlightenment, Anne-Robert-Jacques Turgot,
Baron de l’Aulne (1727–1781) and
Marie-Jean-Antoine-Nicolas de Caritat, Marquis de Condorcet
(1743–1794), integrated reflections on scientific discoveries
into their writings on progress. Turgot, a minister to Louis XVI,
produced two influential works, 
A Philosophical Review of the
Successive Advances of the Human Mind
 and 
On Universal
History
. Condorcet was inspired by Turgot to write 
Outlines
of an Historical View of the Progress of the Human Mind
, a piece
that echoes many of Turgot’s convictions. Although Condorcet
wrote his essay in prison during the Terror, his work, like Turgot,
evinces optimism about the future of France and of humanity as a
whole.



Both authors suggest that philosophical progress is the deepest
condition of scientific progress. Influenced by British empiricism,
Turgot and Condorcet assert that all human knowledge is grounded in
experience. According to Turgot, the renaissance of science first
required an empiricist turn, that is, an abandoning of explanations
appealing to faculties and essences. The scientific experiment then
found its place as the centerpiece of the scientific method and as the
vehicle of further progress (Turgot 1750, 45; 1751, 100–01).
Condorcet reiterates these points and provides a wealth of examples of
recent scientific discoveries (1795, 168–70). Turgot and
Condorcet agree that scientific progress is dependent on mathematical
and technological progress, and vice versa (Turgot 1750, 45; Condorcet
1795, 231).



Although neither author rigorously defines human well-being, both
believe that, over the long term, scientific discoveries and political
freedom reinforce each other and together support the betterment of
humanity. Turgot considers the role that political institutions play
in advancing science. He thinks that individual genius moves science
forward. Political institutions are important to scientific progress
insofar as they allow geniuses to flourish. Variation in scientific
achievement is to be explained not by the concentration of genius but
by the institutions that either suppress or encourage it (Turgot 1751,
88). Despotic government is bad for genius, while republics nurture
it. Condorcet also remarks that free institutions are the native
environment of scientific discovery (1795, 129). In turn, the growth
of scientific knowledge will advance political freedom (Turgot 1750,
43).



Turgot and Condorcet also hold that short-term decline can be part of
a pattern of long-term improvement. In the intellectual realm, the
path to truth is rocky, and errors are frequently the first result of
reflection (Turgot 1750, 44; Condorcet 1795, 37–38). For
instance, the false scientific philosophy of faculties and essences is
born of reflection on phenomena. In the realm of action, devastating
events like war and conquest can ultimately unite scattered groups of
people and facilitate political organization (Turgot 1751,
71–72; Condorcet 1795, 51). Moreover, Turgot argues that
individuals and groups that contribute to progress are often motivated
by emotion or personal interest (1751, 69–70). The second
observation is related to the first, since Turgot thinks that the
agents of creative destruction are usually narrowly self-interested or
driven by emotion.


1.2 Metaphysics of History and Teleological Conceptions of Progress



Though the Enlightenment rejected supernaturalism, some Enlightenment
thinkers introduced their own teleology. Hegel offers the most
developed—and the most criticized—teleological account of
historical progress (1824a, 1824b, 1857). In his view, there is a
logic underlying world history which determines its course and
displays its meaning. That logic is “Geist,” also known as
“Spirit.” The essence of Spirit is Freedom (Hegel 1821),
and this Idea is manifested in political structures. The myriad events
in history, including wars, conflicts, and the development of the
(modern) State, are the gradual manifestation of Spirit in human life.
In Hegel’s own words, “History is the process whereby the
Spirit discovers itself and its own concept” (1857, 62). Two
controversial implications follow from this philosophy of history. The
first one is forward-looking. If we can discover this logic of
history, we can basically predict the future of humanity. The other is
backward-looking. If all historical phenomena are the working of the
“cunning of reason,” we should view human tragedies and
conflicts as inevitable for the realization of Freedom. Every event
just provides further grist to the mill of progress.



But even more controversial is Hegel’s own interpretation of
empirical history (1857). According to his speculation, Spirit unfolds
itself in world history over four stages of freedom. It began
thousands of years ago with the “Oriental despotism” of
the East (consisting of China, India, and Persia). Spirit then
advanced through two qualitatively higher stages in the Greek and the
Roman worlds, in which Freedom was partially instituted through
city-states and republican systems. The fourth stage took place in the
German world marked by the Protestant Reformation. Hegel ends his
narrative of progress at his own time and place, Prussia, where Spirit
had at last fully objectified its Freedom in the form of
constitutional monarchy. Few philosophers of progress today endorse
Hegel’s metaphysics of history (see section 2), while many
continue to criticize Hegel’s Eurocentric interpretation of
history (see section 3), independently of his metaphysics.



Hegel’s teleological conception of historical progress was
adopted and adapted by Karl Marx (1845, 1873). Similar to Hegel, Marx
believes that history has its own goal and operates outside the casual
chain. But unlike Hegel, he does not believe that the goal is the
manifestation of Spirit through liberating the individual
consciousness of human beings. Quite the opposite, Marx believes that
the goal is the liberation of human capacities through the development
of material forces. This view is widely known as historical
materialism. The fundamental fact about a society at any given moment
is not its ideological orientation but rather its “productive
forces” (Marx 1845, 150), by which Marx means its material and
technological resources. In the long run, the productive forces
determine other aspects of a society, starting with the relations of
production, the informal and formal rules that define and regulate
property (1845, 151). Marx builds on these assumptions to define
capitalism and communism and to predict the former’s eventual
transformation into the latter. Marx’s insights on the role of
material forces in determining history continue to influence
contemporary discussions on social change (see section 2.3).



Even though different teleological accounts of progress diverge on how
progress comes about and where it ends, being a 
teleological

account, they converge on the 
nature
 of progress, with three
definitive features. The first is that progress is

predetermined
 and 
inevitable
. Laws of history,
whatever they are, operate independently of causal chains of events in
the natural world. Human agency or institutional design cannot change
the arc of history. The second is that progress is 
global
.
Laws of history govern the world and humanity as a whole. Local
regressions are temporary or mere aberrations. Finally, progress is

linear
. The world is advancing toward freedom constantly,
marching from one epoch to the next. In other words, the idea of
progress as inevitable, global, and linear is informed by teleological
understandings of history. As noted earlier, nowadays many refer to
this as “the” Enlightenment idea of progress only to
dismiss it out of hand. But this is misleading. As the following
section shows, there is another Enlightenment idea of progress, which
is open-ended and non-linear, informed by a naturalistic understanding
of history.


1.3 Anthropology and Non-teleological Conceptions of Progress



Kant is among the few exceptions during the Enlightenment to
articulate a non-teleological conception of progress, although this
reading is contentious (see Allen 2016; Gray 2004; Koselleck 2002).
The contention arises from Kant’s ambiguous remarks in 
Idea
for a Universal History with a Cosmopolitan Aim
. For example, he
writes, “One can regard the history of the human species in the
large as the completion of a hidden plan of nature to bring about an
inwardly and, to this end, also an externally perfect state
constitution, as the only condition in which it can fully develop all
its predispositions in humanity” (the eighth proposition, Wood
1991, 19). While the idea that nature has a progressive plan sounds
teleological, it is best read as a “heuristic assumption”
or a “regulative principle” (Kleingeld 1999; Wood 1991;
Møller 2021; Ypi 2010). That is, we should believe 
as
if
 progress were nature’s plan so that hope and responsible
human action are possible. Put differently, a more accurate
understanding of Kant’s philosophy of progress is not
metaphysical but anthropological. Contrary to Hegel, Kant is not
trying to discover meaning or a specific trajectory from the actual
course of history; rather, he wants to consider how human nature and
agency have made possible the progressive trends in his own time. This
naturalistic and practical project of progress, as we will see in
section 2, is still being actively developed today. To understand the
contemporary responses, we need to take a closer look at Kant’s
own naturalistic account. 



In Kant’s view, progress is not predetermined but conditioned by
nature—two features of human nature to be exact, viz. our
capacity to reason and our “unsocial sociability” (the
third and fourth propositions, Wood 1991, 13). Kant argues that the
human species is unique in its capacity for setting its own ends. This
sets us apart from non-human animals who are only governed by
instincts and lack a sense of self and “self-esteem.” This
sense of self-esteem, as it was first developed, did not give rise to
a sense of equal human worth but a craving in each of us to dominate
one another. But such “unsocial” tendencies came into
tension with our “social” tendencies, including love,
sympathy, humanity, and the need for friendship (Kant 1798). These
conflicting tendencies provided the condition for the further
development of reason to discipline our unruly passions and live in
union as free and equal citizens.



Kant also argues for the role of institutions in enabling progress.
The capacity for reasoning can only reach its fullest expression in
free and peaceful circumstances. In 
Perpetual Peace
, Kant
(1795) argues that a federation of republics is most conducive to
peace. Each republic is governed by the rule of law whose members are
free and equal citizens. A federation of republics is a group of
nations who have agreed to observe rules of peaceful conduct in their
mutual relations. The domestic and international features of this
institutional constellation will reinforce each other. Republics will
not go to war with each other because a declaration of war requires
the consent of the public who are reluctant to suffer the costs of
war. In turn, domestic conditions will be improved in the absence of a
state’s constant involvement in wars. Viewed this way, contra
Hegel, political institutions and peace are not the inevitable
manifestation of the end of history; rather, they merely provide the
most favorable conditions conducive to freedom.



Informed by this non-teleological understanding of history, contra
Hegel and Marx, Kant has a markedly different, and arguably more
plausible, idea of progress. Progress is neither linear nor
inevitable; it is merely 
possible
. Kant does not think that
humanity will necessarily achieve emancipation. He merely thinks that

if
 we reason responsibly and well, under favorable
institutional design, then over time we will become free. The future
of human history remains open. As we will see in the next section,
each of the three core conditions of progress identified by
Kant—human nature, reason, and institutions—continue to be
subjected to empirical scrutiny and philosophical elaboration.


2. Contemporary Views on Progress



The Enlightenment discourse on progress has sparked two contemporary
discourses, one that salvages and revives it, and another that ends
it. Section 2 offers an overview on the former and section 3 discusses
the latter. As the analysis in section 1 has shown, the Enlightenment
discourse tends to take for granted both the fact and the end of
progress. The central question is how to account for it. Today, while
philosophers continue to share the age-old ambition to account for and
advance progress, few defend the sweeping claim that there is, or will
be, progress, at least not in a global and linear fashion. Nor do they
understand the end of progress so narrowly in terms of freedom. As
noted in the introduction, this shift is due in large part to the
change in political climate from the 18
th
 to the
20
th
 century. Having witnessed regressions as well as
abuses of the idea of progress, contemporary defenders of progress are
cautious of the naïve optimism as well as the Eurocentrism of the
Enlightenment (see Buchanan and Powell 2018; Moody-Adams 1999, 2017;
Forst 2017). The challenges facing “Enlightenment 2.0,” to
use Joseph Heath’s (2014) term, are therefore to reconceptualize
an idea of progress that is compatible with natural sciences and
empirical history (section 2.1), to redefine measures of progress that
acknowledge value pluralism and risks of human error (section 2.2),
and to vindicate, refine, or rebut some of the Enlightenment
assumptions about conditions of progress (section 2.3). 


2.1 Evolution and Non-teleological Conceptions of Progress



If the Enlightenment discourse of progress was the first stage of
naturalizing progress, the contemporary discourse marks its
completion. As evolutionary sciences have matured, both
supernaturalism and teleology have lost their explanatory power
(however, 
moral
 teleology still enjoys some respectable
defenders; see 2.2 for details). Many contemporary philosophers of
progress believe that laws of evolution can adequately explain the
existence of historical phenomena, without violating the laws of
physics and without appealing to purposes (Jamieson 2002a; Hayek 2011;
Kitcher 2011; Kitcher et al. 2021; Kumar and Campbell 2022). From an
evolutionary perspective, widely considered features of progress,
including norms of fairness, institutions of peace, and human rights
instruments, are products of the causal interplay between nature and
human agency over deep evolutionary time. More specifically, they are
diverse, highly complex forms of social technology developed by our
ancestors to resolve practical problems arising from associated living
over a cumulative process of adaptation and learning. Progress as such
is 
natural
 because it is reconciled with a Darwinian story of
life, i.e., an adaptation evolving through natural selection in order
to enhance reproductive fitness. There is no appeal to a telos of
history or to facts of rationality (cf. Buchanan and Powell 2018) or
objective values to which human mind and conduct are supposed to
conform.



Different philosophers understand “problems” differently.
In an influential evolutionary account of progress, pragmatist Philip
Kitcher (2011, 2021) characterizes problems as “altruism
failures”—situations in which members of a group do not
act in ways that acknowledge the interests or desires of co-members.
Altruism failures put our ancestors at risk in the environment of
evolutionary adaptation (EEA). EEA, which occurred between 1.8 million
and 10,000 years ago, presented extremely harsh conditions for groups
to survive, sustain, and pass on their social arrangements. Humans
lived in small, scattered groups. They were thrown into severe
competition for scarce resources. Altruism failures impeded the
cooperation needed and, in some cases, led to destructive conflicts
between group members. Groups that developed the “capacity for
normative guidance” allowed them to better adapt to EEA. In its
original and simplest form, the capacity consists in “an ability
to transform a situation that would otherwise have been an altruism
failure, by means of a commitment to following a rule: you obey the
command to give weight to the wishes of the other” (Kitcher
2011, 74). Rule-recognition is the surrogate for “psychological
altruism,” issuing in “behavioural altruism.” As the
ecological conditions changed and the scale of the groups grew, this
normative capacity allowed groups to devise more complex rules of
fairness, conceptions of the good, norms of punishment, and systems of
rule-interpretation and transmission to regulate cooperation.
Naturalistic progress consists in the functional refinement of these
norms, conceptions of the good, and institutions of enforcement and
interpretation to solve problems of altruism failures.



Others define problems more generally in terms of a deficiency in
well-being. For example, according to F.A. von Hayek’s
“common sense” account of progress, progress consists in
the functional refinement of any social technology that better
satisfies human desires or achieves goals more effectively (2011). An
important instance of progress, in Hayek’s view, is the
institution of trade. Contra feudalism and a planned economy, free
market exchange improves human welfare, chiefly our material
conditions, through the division of labor, specialization, and the
exchange of goods and services, which in turn increases productivity,
creativity, and economic growth. 



As explained in section 1.2, the teleological account of progress
informs an idea of progress that is predetermined, global, and linear.
By contrast, this naturalistic understanding of how progress comes
about importantly reshapes 
what
 progress is. First of all,
progress is no longer predetermined; it is 
open-ended
. In
Kitcher’s words, naturalistic progress is a kind of
“progress from” as opposed to “progress to”
(2011, 228; 2021, 25). There is no end of history to which humanity
can aspire. In the absence of any fixed goal, the sequence of
transitions consists in identifying new problems and finding better
solutions that overcome existing problems. In a similar vein, Hayek
argues that while human intellect enables us to make progress by
solving problems and satisfying desires, our desires and aims also
constantly change, presenting new room for growth. He writes,
“As progress consists in the discovery of the not yet known, its
consequences must be unpredictable…Human reason can neither
predict nor deliberately shape its own future. Its advances consist in
finding out where it has been wrong” (2011, 94). While Kitcher
accounts for the open-endedness in terms of the evolving nature of
problematic situations and Hayek the evolving nature of desires,
Buchanan and Powell explain the open-ended nature of progress in terms
of our “capacity to reflect on and revise our moral norms and
modify our behaviour accordingly” (2018, 180; see also Kumar and
Campbell 2022). The reason why we can see problems as problems or
develop new desires beyond the confines of our biological nature and
immediate culture is because we can engage in critical reasoning. It
is debatable whether the appeal to this innate capacity for critical
reasoning smuggles teleology back into the naturalistic picture of
progress. 



Another feature of naturalistic progress is that it is 
local

(Moody-Adams 1999; Kitcher et al. 2021; Buchanan and Powell 2018) as
opposed to 
global
. Enlightenment thinkers tend to take
humanity as a whole as the subject of history. However, from an
evolutionary perspective, this does not make sense. Even if, as
members of the human species, we share certain universal biological
and psychological traits, as individuals and groups, we all adapt to
our own local ecological conditions, with specific tools inherited
from our ancestors and cultural traditions. In other words, there is
little causal connection between the states of affairs of one group
and another whose ecological conditions are drastically different. As
such, the language of progress is inapplicable on a cross-cultural
scale. But even 
intra
-cultural assessments of progress are
increasingly thought to be challenging since within a single cultural
system, there are various domains, from political to economic to
moral. As Hayek argues, trade advances material progress but arguably
at the cost of moral progress, because it exacerbates inequalities in
wealth and status. These gains and losses in various domains are often
incommensurable, making all-things-considered assessments of progress,
even within a single culture, difficult. The tendency to localize
progress does not even stop at particular 
domains
. Buchanan
and Powell (2018, 53–58) argue that even within a single domain
such as morality, there are also different 
types
. Their
non-exhaustive list includes: (1) better compliance with valid moral
norms, (2) better moral concepts, (3) better understandings of the
virtues, (4) better moral motivation, (5) better moral reasoning, (6)
proper demoralization, (7) proper moralization, (8) better
understandings of moral standing and moral statuses, (9) improvements
in understandings of the nature of morality. To illustrate how moral
progress can occur at the level of 
type
, consider our
relations with non-human animals. Compared to decades ago, Western
societies tend to understand that animals have intrinsic moral status
and that their interests and preferences should be given weight in our
deliberation. Many find factory farming hard to justify on moral
grounds. Yet, the majority population continues to consume
factory-farmed products, indicating the lack of improvement in moral
motivation in this regard.



Finally, naturalistic progress is 
non-linear
. While critics
of progress see the world wars, the Holocaust, and the new wave of
illiberal populism as the strongest evidence that progress is a
delusion, defenders argue that progress, properly conceived, is fully
compatible with major regressions. From a naturalistic perspective,
progress is not the stages of development through which societies or
civilizations predictably and inevitably pass, as Hegel and Marx
argue. Rather, progress is the process of adaptation and learning via
the modification of the human intellect. It may succeed, but it may
fail too. Many contemporary philosophers of progress readily admit
that the path to progress has been haphazard, empirically speaking.
The normative goal of the project of progress is to render it
“more systematic, more frequent, and more secure” (Kitcher
et al. 2021, 30). Conceived in this way, the research program of
progress is far from obsolete.


2.2 Moral Realism and Teleological Conceptions of Progress



Not every contemporary defender of progress endorses the Darwinian
story of human development, at least not in the moral domain. These
anti-Darwinians are often called “moral realists.” Moral
realism (see entry on
 
moral realism
),
 as the label suggests, is committed to the metaphysical claim that
morality is real. That is to say, there are objective moral truths,
which are irreducible to subjective sentiments or contingent social
norms developed in evolutionary history. For the realist, moral
progress consists in the 
discovery
 of such objective moral
truths. The realist’s discovery model of moral progress
contrasts sharply with the pragmatist’s problem-solving model of
moral progress (section 2.1). As seen, pragmatists tend to deflate
morality into a system of social technology that is used to resolve
coordination and cooperative problems arising from lived experience.
For the pragmatist, there is no fixed, practice-independent standards
of rightness and wrongness to 
discover
; there are only
ever-changing, practice-dependent problems to be identified and
solved. And pragmatist progress consist in the increased efficiency in
identifying and solving such problems. Care should be taken not to
conflate the realist’s teleological conception of progress with
the Enlightenment teleological conception of progress. As seen in
section 1.2, the latter explains progress by way of the “law of
history,” which in turn informs a conception of progress as
predetermined beyond the control of human agency. By contrast, the
realist’s metaphysical commitment is narrower in scope, namely
that laws of morality are outside of the causal chain and set fixed
goals for right action. How individuals and societies discover and
obey these moral laws is within the control of human agency, leaving
room for reasoning and institutional design (Sauer 2023).



An important issue in the realist account of moral progress is whether
subjective experience is always an obstacle to moral discovery. Peter
Singer (2011) argues that it is. In contrast to the naturalistic
account, Singer claims that moral progress does not happen 
because
of
 blind forces of evolutionary history, but 
in spite of

them. As a utilitarian, Singer believes that the objective moral truth
consists in maximizing overall well-being as guided by the principle
of equal consideration. This objective moral truth of impartial
benevolence is discoverable via reasoning. Once human agents exercise
their innate rational capacity, abstract themselves from biasing
elements in experience (e.g., social norms, unruly sentiments,
subjective desires, ingroup bias), they would be able to arrive at an
objective viewpoint, articulate universally valid moral principles in
conformity with rules of logic and norms of consistency. He attributes
much of actual moral progress, that is, the move away from tribal
morality (e.g., feudalism, ethnocentrism, racism, sexism) to impartial
morality (e.g., humanitarian aid to the global poor, greater concern
for animals), to this form of pure reasoning. It is pure reasoning
that has helped us humans to overcome our selfish desires and
arbitrary conventions inherited from our ancestors and discover the
truth of moral equality.



Thomas Nagel (2023) has recently defended a more nuanced realist
account, recognizing the positive role of subjective experience in
advancing moral progress. Contrary to Singer, Nagel does not think
that moral progress consists in the gradual recognition and
application of a single, timeless, normative principle such as
impartial benevolence. Indeed, he thinks this would be a moral loss.
Nagel identifies two models of moral progress: one involving the
recognition of objective and timeless reasons for right action that
have existed unrecognized for a long time (the discovery model); the
other involving the gradual development of moral norms and values in
subjective historical experience. His examples of the first type
include the end of slavery and the suppression of homosexuality. As
Nagel argues, the idea that pain is bad, the moral requirement of
equal treatment, the wrongness of absolute domination are

accessible
 through exercising the human capacities for
reasoning. The latter include: to “recognize [that] reasons for
action apply equally to oneself and others”; to “object or
feel indignation when others do not act in accordance with those
reasons”; to “recognize the objections of others when one
fails to act in accordance with them oneself”; and to
“acknowledge such failure on one’s own part with something
like guilt”. His examples of the second type of moral progress
include the conceptions of freedom of expression and freedom of
religion. In Nagel’s view, the reasons for endorsing the
principles that underpin political liberalism are

inaccessible
 to inhabitants of feudalism. Unless and until
one has arrived at a modern understanding of the conditions of
political legitimacy and the autonomy of the individual in relation to
the state, no amount of good reasoning, not even with the aid of
imagination, can grasp these concepts. Arguably, Nagel’s move to
recognize the role of normative and institutional developments in
lived experience blurs the distinction between the teleological and
non-teleological conceptions of moral progress. 


2.3 Value Pluralism and Measures of Progress



So far, we have looked at contemporary efforts to make plausible the
idea of progress in light of evolutionary sciences. Supposing that the
open-ended, pluralistic, local, and non-linear idea of progress is
plausible, how can we use it to evaluate states of affairs? Or, to put
it another way, how do we derive particular normative judgments of
progress for instances of attitudinal or behavioral pattern shifts
from this dynamic but potentially empty idea of progress? How do we
know whether the end of factory farming, the demoralization of
homosexuality, and the degrowth movement are instances of progress, if
there are multiple and evolving goalposts?



The pluralistic nature of the idea of progress rules out what Dale
Jamieson (2002b) calls the “naïve conception.”
According to the naïve conception, “moral progress occurs
when a subsequent state of affairs is better than a preceding one, or
when right acts become increasingly prevalent”. As he explains,
this works well if there is a single fixed principle of right action
(e.g., impartial benevolence) or a stable set of virtues. Yet, few
today believe that deontology, consequentialism, or virtue ethics on
their own are necessary or sufficient for measuring the status quo.
The reason is that value pluralism is an endemic feature of modern
society. This may be one of the most painful but important lessons to
draw from the Enlightenment project. In the Enlightenment discourse,
there is little discussion of the criteria of progress. Freedom is
taken for granted as the ultimate and singular standard of good by
which all human civilizations should be measured. Civilizations that
did not institute freedom or organized themselves around other values
(e.g., honor, loyalty) were judged to be backward. As many have
rightly noted, this Enlightenment ideal of progress is Eurocentric and
has been used to rationalize colonialism (for a more detailed
discussion, see section 3).



While one should resist the temptation to prescribe the fixed and
universal measures of progress, giving into cultural relativism seems
equally dangerous. Without any normative measure of progress, it
becomes impossible to guide social change away from an unjust status
quo, or to evaluate certain states of affairs as better, not even the
abolition of chattel slavery or the demoralization of homosexuality
(Buchanan and Powell 2018; Forst 2017).



The challenge becomes how to develop measures of progress that
acknowledge both the risks of human error and the fact of value
pluralism (Buchanan and Powell 2018; Richardson et al. 2018). Three
solutions are on offer. The first is to begin from paradigmatic cases.
Dale Jamieson (2002b and 2017) argues that any plausible index of
progress must at least recognize “the abolition of war and
slavery, the reduction of poverty and class privilege, the extension
of liberty, the empowerment of marginalized groups, and respect for
animals and nature” as cases of moral progress. He further notes
that a wide range of normative theories, including utilitarianism,
virtue ethics, deontology, and capabilities approaches, can account
for the values expressed in these cases. But as he concedes, the
belief that the above are paradigmatic cases may still be a product of
ethnocentric bias, namely bias toward the liberal culture of
Jamieson’s own time. For example, illiberal cultures that are
hierarchical, paternalistic, or practice warrior ways of life are
backward by his index.



One way to get around first-order normative theorizing and the
potential parochial bias (Larmore 2008) that afflicts it is to devise
reliable methods of inquiry that update norms and practices. This
solution is proposed by pragmatists such as Philip Kitcher and
Elizabeth Anderson (Kitcher et al. 2021; Anderson 2014, 2015, 2016).
As explained, pragmatists see progress in terms of problem-solving.
The first step to advancing progress is to identify problems or
“problematic situations” (Kitcher et al. 2021,
33–35). Kitcher defines a 
prima facie
 morally
problematic situation as one where an individual or a group
“resents” the situation. To reliably identify problems,
“ideal conversation” or “democratic
contractualism” is typically necessary (35–37). That is
where all the affected are included to discuss the challenged practice
or norm under the conditions of full information and mutual sympathy.
The justified solution would be one which all the affected in this
ideal conservation would endorse. Anderson also sees the epistemic
value in democratic discussion but offers a non-ideal version of it.
In her view, “moral blindness” is a major obstacle to
problem identification. Moral blindness is usually rooted in
unaccountable power and operates via cognitive biases. The force of a
better argument is rarely sufficient to correct it. Instead, she
proposes contentious politics in the form of social movements or even
violent resistance as a method. Drawing on historical cases such as
British abolitionism and the Civil Rights Movement, Anderson argues
that contentious politics has the tendency to destabilize norms and
initiate a genuine collective reflection rather than rationalization.




The third solution is to defend moral realism (Sauer 2023; FitzPatrick
2019; Huemer 2016, 2019) and acknowledge that there are
mind-independent moral facts or truths in the world. For example,
Michael Huemer suggests that over the past decades and centuries,
there has been a sharp decline in torture, murder, rape, war, slavery,
capital punishment, and colonialism. This is a markedly recent and
coherent shift to liberal morality. By inference to the best
explanation, liberal values such as the moral equality of persons,
respect for the dignity of individuals, and an objection to gratuitous
coercion and violence are true. While critics of moral realism might
argue that these liberal values are subject to intense disagreement
and fly in the face of value pluralism, realists might reply by
arguing that realism is compatible with disagreement or that all
cultures share the same moral foundations and differ only in their
instantiation (Sauer 2023).


2.4 The Role of Human Nature



As seen in Kant’s naturalistic account, human psychology,
reason, and institutions are conjectured as three core conditions of
progress. In the contemporary literature, each of these three
conditions is still being elaborated and contested in light of new
empirical findings.



Kant’s discussion of “unsocial sociability”
continues today under the label of “tribalism.” Drawing on
evolutionary biology, psychology, and cultural evolution, philosophers
are debating whether tribal nature constrains inclusive-type moral
progress. According to the view of
“evo-conservatism”—a term coined by Buchanan and
Powell (2018)—it does. In its strongest version,
evo-conservatism consists of two core 
empirical
 claims,
namely that (a) the ecological challenges under EEA that our ancestors
faced generated selection pressures for evaluative tendencies (e.g.,
parochial altruism, group-mindedness, partiality) that limited
effective moral commitments to members of one’s own kin, group,
tribe, or nation; furthermore, (b) these tendencies are
“hard-wired” into our brain and as such unalterable. Some
political conservatives (Posner and Singer 2001; Goldsmith and Posner
2005; Fukuyama 2002) draw the 
normative
 conclusion from this
empirical fact that the moral circle cannot, and should not, be
indefinitely expanded to include “others” who are
physically, biologically, or culturally distant from “us.”
In this view, projects like global justice and animal rights are
doomed to fail.



It must be noted that one can be an evo-conservative without being a
political conservative. For example, bioethicists ﻿Ingmar
Persson and Julian Savulescu (2019) argue that precisely because our
nature is exclusionary, we should enhance our cognition for a more
inclusive future. The most sustained objection to evo-conservatism
comes from Buchanan and Powell (2018). They reject both of its
empirical claims. First, even in EEA, there was inter-group
cooperation, in the forms of trade, exogamy, military alliances, and
so forth. In other words, EEA was not always a war between
“us” and “them.” Selection pressures in fact
generated “adaptatively plastic” traits rather than rigid
groupishness. Next, drawing on theories of cultural evolution, they
further argue that tribal tendencies are not biologically determined
but culturally conditioned. Cultural innovations in the forms of new
moral norms, more sophisticated moral reasoning, and new techniques
for perspective-taking, coupled with actual and perceived material
comfort and physical security to a reasonable degree, mean that
inclusive traits 
can
 develop. The “Two Great
Expansions,” i.e., expanding human rights to all humans in
virtue of their inherent humanity and expanding moral consideration to
animals in virtue of their inherent moral status, for Buchanan and
Powell, are the best evidence that inclusive traits 
have

developed, under favorable socio-economic and cultural conditions
(Buchanan 2020, 23).


2.5 The Role of Reason



Turning now to the role of reason, the Enlightenment faith in
reason’s ability to elevate humanity by improving moral belief
and action has been both challenged and vindicated (Kumar and May
forthcoming). Sentimentalists argue that emotions, not reasoning or
reasons, are the major engines of change. One strand of support comes
from experimental psychology (Nichols 2004, 2021; Prinz 2007). For
example, research shows that the emotion of disgust makes
people’s moral evaluations harsher, even though the object of
disgust (e.g., foul smell) is irrelevant (cf. May 2014; Landy and
Goodwin 2015). Another source of support comes from empirical history.
Anthony Appiah (2010) argues that long prior to the occurrence of many
cases of moral progress, including the British abolition of the slave
trade and the end of footbinding in Imperial China, the belief that
those relevant practices were immoral was already widely held. What
ultimately garnered momentum in those cases of progress was
emotion—in particular, emotions of collective shame and honor.
Not only is reason’s power in motivating right action
challenged; its epistemic potential in correcting biases and
falsehoods is undermined, too. A relevant area of research is post-hoc
rationalization (Haidt 2001). Researchers find that people 
do

reason, but they often reason in search of evidence and arguments to
defend their pre-existing judgments. To put it metaphorically, reason
is not an impartial judge but a passionate lawyer. To the extent that
our pre-existing judgments are flawed, the more we reason, the more
entrenched we become in the problematic status quo.



In response to these sentimentalist challenges, some rationalists
argue that the problems lie not in rationality itself but in the
overly individualistic model of rationality of the Enlightenment.
While it is generally true that individuals cannot resist unruly
passions or introspect their own biases, 
collectives
 can.
Different forms of collective reasoning have been proposed. For
example, Joseph Heath (2014) suggests institutionalizing the
“head” over the “heart.” In his view,
parliamentary democracy entrenches “demagoguery, short-termism,
simple-minded populism, the excessive influence of money and the role
played by special interests” and would be better replaced by
technocracy and “slow politics.” Similarly, drawing on
argumentation theory, Hugo Mercier (2011) claims that post-hoc
rationalization is not irrational; quite the contrary, it is a useful
cognitive mechanism for individuals to form, exchange, and evaluate
arguments when others disagree with us. Evidence suggests that in
small-group, well-controlled settings, when individuals recognize that
their decisions are unjustifiable, they change their mind. Others
reject the dichotomy between rationalism and sentimentalism as false.
Developing upon the dual-process model of cognition, Kumar and
Campbell (2022) claim that moral judgments consist of both emotions
and beliefs. More importantly, reasoning can change moral judgments
when it recognizes inconsistency between emotions and beliefs. And the
change is typically diachronic rather than synchronic. This form of
“moral consistency reasoning,” they argue, played a
crucial role in facilitating the gay rights revolution, among
others.



Another way to vindicate the role of reason in progress is to not
focus on the 
form
 of reasoning but rather its

object
. In the philosophy of social science literature,
theorists argue that reasoning can be effective in facilitating
progressive change if it is leveraged against 
social norms

(Bicchieri 2016; Tam 2020). On Cristina Bicchieri’s influential
account, social norms are recurrent patterns of behavior motivated by
shared empirical and normative expectations of conditional conformity
in a relevant network. What is unique about social norms as a kind of
social practice is their “expectation and membership
dependent” justificatory structure. In the mind of the
followers, they think they ought to conform primarily because

their
 members think 
they
 should, even if they
privately do not value it or outsiders object to it. As experimental
and field studies have shown, many problematic social practices such
as female genital cutting, honor killing, corruption, and physical
punishment turn out to be social norms. In an important case study,
Bicchieri finds that informational campaigns about the harm to health
or moral argumentation about bodily autonomy and gender equality were
ineffective in ending female genital cutting in Sudan. The individuals
involved in such practices were not gripped by these prudential and
moral considerations but something fundamentally 
social
,
namely Sudanese shared expectations about chastity, beauty, and
parental love. In this case, even though reasoning about prudential
and moral considerations was ineffective, reasoning about the relevant
social considerations and redefining them was.



Some philosophers argue that social norms operative with their own
distinct logic. As such, identifying, evaluating, and reinterpreting
these social norms demands a new form of reasoning, in contrast to
standard impartialist and argumentative accounts of moral reasoning.
For example, Alison Jaggar and Theresa Tobin (2013) argue that
changing local cultural norms requires a collaborative form of
reasoning guided by trust and deference to authorities. In a similar
spirit, Agnes Tam (2020) advances an account of
“we”-reasoning to change social norms, distinguished by
its communitarian (as opposed to democratic) structure, and its
respect for the conformist and parochial tendencies of the
“we” that is constitutive of social norms. Even though the
power of social norms is fast gaining attention from social change
theorists, some contend that social norms, reified in social
structures, are not reason-responsive (Haslanger 2017, 2018). This
takes us to the last core condition of progress: political
institutions and activism.


2.6 The Role of Institutions



To a large extent, one’s view on the role of institutions in
progress follows from that of the role of human nature and reason. For
those who think that our evolved nature forecloses the possibility of
progress, no amount of institutional design can reopen it. By
contrast, for those who think that progress is a matter of nurture,
institutions of the right kind are an important vehicle of progress.
To some, the right kind of institutions are liberal. A liberal state
can bring about physical security and peace, conditions under which
inclusive tendencies develop (Buchanan and Powell 2018; Buchanan
2020). A free market fosters material progress (Hayek 2011) and
mutually beneficial group relations and inter-group trust, which in
turn fosters moral progress (Buchanan and Powell 2018). Freedom of
information and expression enables critical reflection, such that
authority and customs can be challenged, resentment and dissent heard,
and prejudices and biases corrected (Heath 2014; Huemer 2016). British
abolitionism is a case in point (Buchanan and Powell 2018). In the
late 18
th
 and early 19
th
 centuries, British
society was materially better-off and physically more secure. The
invention of the free press at the time also enhanced levels of
literacy and facilitated expression of and responsiveness to the
wrongness of slavery.



In contrast to the liberal tradition, the Marxist tradition tends to
locate progress outside of institutions and in political struggles
(Jaeggi 2018). This is due to Marxists’ sociological
understanding of the function of the state as well as their standpoint
epistemology. According to Louis Althusser (2014/1971), there are two
kinds of state apparatuses: repressive and ideological. Repressive
state apparatuses include the government, administration, and courts,
and they function coercively. Ideological state apparatuses include
education, the political system, communication, and culture, and these
apparatuses function non-coercively. Both serve the interests of the
ruling class and enforce the unjust status quo. For example, in a
capitalist society, institutions function to protect and rationalize
the interests of the bourgeoisie. In other words, far from
facilitating freedom and collective learning, institutions are tools
of oppression and the perpetuation of false consciousness. Progress
begins when these institutions are subverted. Political struggles are
the form that such subversion takes.



Political struggles come in many forms, including revolution,
resistance, and social movements. One form that has received a lot of
attention from theorists of progress, Marxists and pragmatists alike,
is the social movement (Young 1990; Haslanger 2021; Anderson 2014;
Moody-Adams 2022). Anderson (2014) singles out the social movement as
a “particularly apt vehicle of progressive moral
transformation.” Likewise, Moody-Adams (2022, 13) views social
movements as potentially “vital sources of moral enlightenment
and advances in collective rationality.” Social movements are
often defined as a form of contentious politics which marginalized
groups use to make claims against the authorities, outside of formal
institutions, by organizing sustained campaigns and using repeated
performances that advertise the claims (Tilly and Tarrow 2015, 11).
There are three ways to account for the aptness of social movements in
facilitating progress. The first way is epistemic. As discussed above,
reasoning, even in good faith, is prone to post-hoc rationalization
and reinforcement of an unjust status quo. By contrast, practical
contention is better able to hold “affected ignorance”
accountable (Moody-Adams 2022). It also leverages the privileged
standpoint of the socially oppressed to destabilize and counteract the
bias suffered by the socially privileged (Anderson 2014) and to
disrupt ideologies and unmask reality (Haslanger 2017), raising
collective consciousness. The second way is motivational. The display
of “worthiness,” “unity,”
“numbers,” and “commitment” in social
movements has been identified as powerful in mobilizing public
support, much more so than the unforced force of a better argument
(Anderson 2014). The third way is normative. In contrast to the
“assimilationist and universalist” logic of formal
democratic institutions, social movements have far fewer constraints
on claim-making. Not only can social movements avoid erasing group
identities and silencing identity-based injustices (Young 1991;
Moody-Adams 2022), through story-telling and emotional expressions,
the subaltern can truly realize their agency and emancipation.


3. Critiques of Progress



The preceding discussion has shown the various ways in which the
practical version of the Enlightenment project of progress has been
actively revived. But as noted in the introduction, many philosophers,
predominately in the Frankfurt School, postmodern, and postcolonial
traditions, remain convinced that neither the metaphysical nor the
practical versions should be resuscitated. In what follows, we will
examine the key metaphysical and normative critiques of the
Enlightenment discourse of progress.


3.1 Metaphysical Critiques from Critical Theory and Moral Relativism



Some of the deepest criticisms of progress were produced during and
after the catastrophes and upheavals of the 20th century. A uniting
theme of these diverse criticisms is an alternative view of history
that is contingent, if not tragic. In an oft-quoted passage, Walter
Benjamin (1940 [1969]) uses the metaphor of a storm to conceive of
progress:



A Klee painting named “Angelus Novus” shows an angel
looking as though he is about to move away from something he is
fixedly contemplating. His eyes are staring, his mouth is open, his
wings are spread. This is how one pictures the angel of history. His
face is turned toward the past. Where we perceive a chain of events,
he sees one single catastrophe which keeps piling wreckage upon
wreckage and hurls it in front of his feet. The angel would like to
stay, awaken the dead, and make whole what has been smashed. But a
storm is blowing from Paradise; it has caught in his wings with such
violence that the angel can no longer close them. This storm
irresistibly propels him into the future to which his back is turned,
while the pile of debris before him grows skyward. This storm is what
we call progress.




On this alternative picture, history has no upward trajectory; in
fact, there is no trajectory at all. Humans cannot control the course
of history. We cannot fix past wrongs nor secure a just future. The
lack of human agency is symbolized by the angel who is helplessly
hurled forward by the storm that is history.



This metaphysical view of history informs a very different idea of
progress, one that is fictive. If there are no facts of progress, what
we call progress are just narratives, written by those who are
incapable of looking horrors in the face. In Charles Larmore’s
view, narratives of progress are nothing more than instruments of
“self-congratulation” (2008, 20). Put differently,
progress is an illusion that we see when we view historical events
through our parochial lens. If we were ever able to survey human
affairs from afar, taking the stance of a neutral spectator,
suspending all our interests and commitments, history would just be a
series of random events.



Theodor Adorno, a leading member of the Frankfurt School, writes one
of the most searching critiques of the Enlightenment narrative of
progress. The critique is part metaphysical, part empirical, and part
methodological. As a German and a Jew in exile, Adorno is deeply
critical of the tendency in Hegel’s philosophy of history to
reconcile with the past and justify the status quo. For Adorno, the
philosophical task is to reveal the contingencies and the fractures in
history so as to subvert it. As he famously puts it, “progress
begins where it ends” (Adorno 2005, 150). Genuine progress and
emancipation are only possible when the hegemonic interpretations of
history written by the powerful are contested. In 
Minima
Moralia
 (1974), Adorno first proposes an alternative method of
examining the meaning of history. Instead of moving past human evils
and individual fates in a cursory fashion, as Hegel tends to do,
Adorno suggests that we dwell on individual experience and
catastrophe. In 
Dialectic of Enlightenment
 (2002), Adorno and
Max Horkheimer apply this method and provide an alternative narrative
of modern Europe, according to which the rise of modernity, science,
technology, and capitalism are not products of progress but
regressions. The bourgeois morality and the cultural industries are
not products of moral and artistic progress but mechanisms to blind
the people to capitalistic ideologies as well as placate the oppressed
majority. Since history is by nature contingent and since events have
been tragic, Adorno concludes that there is no rational basis for the
belief that progress is possible, let alone inevitable. As he puts it
bleakly, “We can find nothing in reality that might help to
redeem the promise inherent in the word ‘progress’”
(2006, 143).



But as we have seen in section 2, few contemporary philosophers
explain moral and political progress by making metaphysical claims
about history. Indeed, many are aware of the regressions that critical
theorists have correctly highlighted. As detailed in sections 2.1 and
2.2, most of the contemporary teleological and non-teleological
accounts of progress accommodate the fact and the possibility of
regressions by attributing various roles to human agency.
Consequently, tragedies by themselves do not undermine the possibility
of progress; rather, what they reveal the dark side of human nature,
the lapse of judgment, or the fragility of institutions. Does this
mean that the contemporary idea of progress—one that is
naturalistic, open-ended, local, and non-linear—is not
vulnerable to the metaphysical critique? Not entirely. There is
another form of metaphysical critique to which even the more modest
idea of progress may be subjected. This is the critique from moral
relativism.



Moral relativism takes many forms (see entry on
 
Moral Relativism
)
 but at its core is the idea that there are no objective moral truths.
What is right or wrong, good or evil, is indexed to response-dependent
properties. It is worth noting that unlike nihilism, moral relativism
does not commit to the idea that all moral systems are empty and, as
such, morality is an illusion. To the contrary, moral relativism holds
that there are too many true moral claims. If moral claims are indexed
to culturally inculcated systems of values, then the same moral claim
can be true in some cultures but not others. For example, it might be
true that female genital mutilation is evil in liberal culture but
good in another. The implication for moral progress, as Jesse Prinz
(2007) argues, is that “‘moral progress’ cannot be
interpreted as a transition from one set of values to a morally better
set of values.” This does not just rule out inter-cultural
comparison (which the contemporary local idea of progress does not
allow anyway); it also rules out intra-cultural comparison.
“Moral progress,” even within a cultural community, is
nothing more than “moral conversion” (Prinz 2007, 295). We
fool ourselves into thinking that moral conversion is moral progress
because moral values are self-affirming. Does this mean that moral
relativists have no resources to claim that the abolition of slavery
is an instance of moral progress? Not exactly. Prinz’s response
is that such cases are better understood as examples of
“extramoral” improvement. He identifies
“consistency,” “stability,”
“well-being,” “conformity to biological norms”
as things people value in an extramoral sense (2007, 292). Extramoral
because they are pragmatic, prudential, and hedonic in nature. By this
light, the abolition of slavery could be an extramoral improvement if
slavery were not prudentially valuable. But to call it moral progress
is all but an illusion.


3.2 Normative Critiques from Postmodernism and Postcolonialism



Critics working within postmodern and postcolonial traditions shift
the focus away from the metaphysics of history to the undesirability
of the normative ideal of progress. They argue that the ideal of
progress celebrated by the Enlightenment thinkers is politically
dangerous. It evaluates non-Western societies as
“backward” according to a Eurocentric understanding of the
good, human nature, reason, and sound institutions. This serves as a
rationale for the so-called civilizing mission of the West, falsely
legitimating racism, colonialism, and imperialism (McCarthy 2009). In

Eurocentrism
, Samir Amin (1989) criticizes the Enlightenment
ideal of progress as a product of Eurocentric bias, for three reasons.
Firstly, the ideals of freedom, rationality, and objectivity
characterize all major historical innovations as European. Secondly,
the Enlightenment discourse also views capitalist democracy as the
ideal social system and colonialism as instrumental in spreading it
throughout the world. Finally, it views current global economic
inequality as being caused by internal features of individual
countries and is in principle eliminable.



Other postcolonial scholars are keen to point out the inconsistencies
in the Eurocentric narratives of progress. Specifically, while
Enlightenment thinkers see the norms and institutions of European
modernity as the outcome of a cumulative process of collective
learning, postcolonial scholars argue that they are in fact shaped by
the material and ideological relations between Europe and its
colonies. As Anibal Quijano (2000) notes, Europe was built with the
free labor of the American Indians, blacks, and mestizos, with their
advanced technology in mining and agriculture, and with their products
such as gold, silver, potatoes, tomatoes, and tobacco (see also Fanon
2005). In addition to material dependence, Europe was also
ideologically dependent on its colonies. In 
Orientalism
,
Edward Said (1978) argues that Western scholars have created a binary
distinction between the civilized West and the barbaric East. This
discourse of Orientalism constructs and silences the colonialized and
racialized subjects.



Recently, there have been attempts to decolonize the discourse of
progress. The motivation is that the moral imperative of progress
(improvement of the human condition) can be severed from both
metaphysical overtones and Eurocentric ideologies. Drawing inspiration
from Adorno and Michel Foucault, Amy Allen (2016) sees promise not so
much in the power of reasoning or learning; reason, while not
necessarily a form a madness, is always entangled with power. Progress
begins therefore not from learning how to utilize the capacity to
reason but in 
unlearning
, which Allen defines as “a
critical problematization of our own, historically sedimented point of
view that frees us up in relation to it” (2016, 202). It
cultivates in us a capacity to understand what we do not already
understand and to be humble and modest toward our own moral
certainties.



Catherine Lu (2023) offers yet another interesting proposal. She
rejects the undefended assumption that narratives of progress are
essential for moral and political agency. To the contrary, she
suggests that in the postcolonial world, tragic narratives are not
just empirically grounded or rationally warranted; they are also
morally empowering. As a genre, tragedies reveal the
“indeterminacy of human agency” rather than its
“futility or irrelevance.” Both the powerful and the weak
may be vulnerable to tragic instability in any social structure. More
specifically, tragic narratives can stir “moments of
recognition” of vulnerability in the powerful when they show
that no amount of power—material, intellectual or
moral—can shield one from tragedies. On the other hand, tragic
narratives show the powerless that no tyrant or oppressor is
indestructible and that they can rage, despair, seek vengeance, resist
injustice, and even strive for reconciliation. These are the
overlooked functions of tragic narratives. They provide the public
with a space for critical reflection and also for generating and
sustaining communal solidarity and accountability practices.
Paradoxically, perhaps what progress needs is not more optimistic
progress narratives, which have so preoccupied philosophers and
troubled humanity for centuries, but rather more tragic narratives. In
other words, while the contemporary defenders of progress are still
carrying the torch of their Enlightenment predecessors in explaining
the possibility of progress in its limited forms and developing
sophisticated causal roles for reasoning in advancing it, the
contemporary critics of progress decline to so due to the grave moral
risk. As the critics see it, the most intellectually and politically
responsible task is to highlight the indeterminacy of human
development and unlearn all the false narratives of progress,
including the Enlightenment ones.






Bibliography




Adorno, T.W., 2006, 
History and Freedom: Lectures
1964–1965
, R. Livingstone (trans.), Cambridge, MA:
Polity.


–––, 2005, “Progress,” in

Critical Models: Interventions and Catchwords
, H. Pickford
(trans.), New York: Columbia University Press.


–––, 1974, 
Minima Moralia: Reflections from
Damaged Life
, E.F.N. Jephcott (trans.), London: NLB.


Adorno, T.W., and M. Horkheimer, 2002, 
Dialectic of
Enlightenment: Philosophical Fragments
, E.F.N. Jephcott (trans.),
Stanford: Stanford University Press. 


Allen, A., 2016, 
The End of Progress: Decolonizing the
Normative Foundations of Critical Theory
, New York: Columbia
University Press.


Althusser, L., 2014/1971, “Ideology and Ideological State
Apparatuses,” in 
On the Reproduction of Capitalism: Ideology
and Ideological State Apparatuses
, B. Brewster (trans.), London:
Verso.


Amin, S., 1989, 
Eurocentrism
, R. Moore (trans.), New
York: Monthly Review Press.


Anderson, E., 2016, “The Social Epistemology of Morality:
Learning from the Forgotten History of the Abolition of
Slavery,” in M.S. Brady and M. Fricker (eds), 
The Epistemic
Life of Groups: Essays in the Epistemology of Collectives
,
Oxford: Oxford University Press.


–––, 2015, “Moral Bias and Corrective
Practices: A Pragmatist Perspective,” 
Proceedings and
Addresses of the American Philosophical Association
, 89:
21–47.


–––, 2014, “The Lindsey Lecture Social
Movements, Experiments in Living, and Moral Progress: Case Studies
from Britain’s Abolition of Slavery,”
https://kuscholarworks.ku.edu/handle/1808/14787


Appiah, A., 2010, 
The Honor Code: How Moral Revolutions
Happen
, first edition, New York: W.W. Norton.


Aristotle, 
Meteorology
, E.W. Webster (trans.), in 
The
Complete Works of Aristotle: Volume One
, J. Barnes (ed.),
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1984.


–––, 
Metaphysics
, W.D. Ross (trans.),
in 
The Complete Works of Aristotle: Volume Two
, J. Barnes
(ed.), Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1984.


Augustine, 
The City of God against the Pagans
, R.W. Dyson
(trans.), Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1998.


Benjamin, W., 1940 [1969], “Theses on the Philosophy of
History,” in 
Illuminations
, H. Zohn (trans.), H. Arendt
(ed.), New York: Schocken, 253–64.


Bicchieri, C., 2016, 
Norms in the Wild: How to Diagnose,
Measure, and Change Social Norms
, Oxford: Oxford University
Press.


Buchanan, A.E., 2020, 
Our Moral Fate: Evolution and the Escape
from Tribalism
, Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.


Buchanan, A.E., and R. Powell, 2018, 
The Evolution of Moral
Progress
, Oxford: Oxford University Press.


Condorcet, M., 1795, 
Outlines of an Historical View of the
Progress of the Human Mind
, New York: M. Carey, H. and P. Rice
and Co.


Fanon, F., 2005, 
The Wretched of the Earth
, R. Philcox
(trans.), New York: Grove.


FitzPatrick, W.J., 2019, “Moral Progress for Evolved
Rational Creatures,” 
Analyse
 
& Kritik
, 41:
217–38.


Forst, R., 2017, “The Concept of Progress,” in

Normativity and Power: Analyzing Social Orders of
Justification
, Oxford: Oxford University Press.


Fukuyama, F., 2002, 
Our Posthuman Future
, New York:
Farrar, Straus and Giroux.


Goldsmith, J., and E. Posner, 2005, 
The Limits of
International Law
, Oxford: Oxford University Press.


Gray, J., 2004, 
Heresies
, London: Granta Books.


Haidt, J., 2001, “The Emotional Dog and Its Rational Tail: A
Social Intuitionist Approach to Moral Judgment,”

Psychological Review
, 108: 814–34.


Haslanger, S., 2021, “Political Epistemology and Social
Critique,” in 
Oxford Studies in Political Philosophy
,
Volume 7, D. Sobel (ed.), Oxford: Oxford University Press.


–––, 2018, “What Is a Social
Practice?” 
Royal Institute of Philosophy Supplement
,
82: 231–47.


–––, 2017, “Racism, Ideology, and Social
Movements,” 
Res Philosophica
, 94: 1–22.


Hayek, F.A. von, 2011, 
The Constitution of Liberty: The
Definitive Edition
, New York: Routledge.


Heath, J., 2014, 
Enlightenment 2.0: Restoring Sanity to Our
Politics, Our Economy, and Our Lives
, New York:
HarperCollins.


Hegel, G.W.F., 1824a, 
Reason in History, a General
Introduction to the Philosophy of History
, New York: Liberal Arts
Press, 1953.


–––, 1824b, 
The Philosophy of
History
, New York: Dover Publications, 1956.


–––, 1857, 
Lectures on the Philosophy
of World History
, H.B. Nisbet (trans.), Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1975.


–––, 1821, 
The Philosophy of Right
,
T.M. Knox (ed.), New York: Oxford University Press, 1967.


Huemer, M., 2016, “A Liberal Realist Answer to Debunking
Skeptics: The Empirical Case for Realism,” 
Philosophical
Studies
, 173(7): 1983–2010.


–––, 2019, “Debunking Leftward
Progress,” 
Ratio
, 32: 312–24.


Jaeggi, R., 2018, 
Critique of Forms of Life
, Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press.


Jaggar, A.M., and T.W. Tobin, 2013, “Situating Moral
Justification: Rethinking the Mission of Moral Epistemology,”

Metaphilosophy
, 44: 383–408.


Jamieson, D., 2002a, 
Morality’s Progress
, Oxford:
Oxford University Press.


–––, 2002b, “Is There Progress in
Morality?,” 
Utilitas
, 14: 318–38.


–––, 2017, “Slavery, Carbon, and Moral
Progress,” 
Ethical Theory and Moral Practice
, 20:
169–83.


Kant, I., 1784, “Idea for a Universal History
with a Cosmopolitan Aim,” A. Wood (trans.), in 
Kant’s
Idea for a Universal History with a Cosmopolitan Aim: A Critical
Guide
, A.O. Rorty and J. Schmidt (eds.), Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press,  2005.


–––, 1784–5, 
Foundations of the
Metaphysics of Morals and, What Is Enlightenment?
, second revised
edition, in 
The Library of Liberal Arts
, New York:
Macmillan, 1990.


–––, 1784–6, 
On History
,
L.W. Beck (ed.), Indianapolis: Bobbs-Merrill, 1963.


–––, 1795, “Perpetual Peace,”
in 
Political Writings
, H.B. Nisbet (trans.), H. Reiss (ed.),
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1991.


–––, 1798, 
Anthropology from a
Pragmatic Standpoint
, M.J. Gregor (trans.), The Hague:
Nijhoff, 1974.


Kitcher, P., 2011, 
The Ethical Project
, Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.


Kitcher, P., et al., 2021, 
Moral Progress
, J-C. Heilinger
(ed.), Oxford: Oxford University Press.


Kleingeld, P., 1999, “﻿Kant, History, and the Idea of
Moral Development,” 
History of Philosophy Quarterly
,
16: 59–80.


Koselleck, R., 2002, “‘Progress’ and
‘Decline’. An Appendix to the History of Two
Concepts,” in 
The Practice of Conceptual History: Timing
History, Spacing Concepts
, T.S. Presner (trans.), Stanford:
Stanford University Press, 218–35.


Kumar, V., and J. May, forthcoming, “Moral Reasoning and
Moral Progress,” in 
The Oxford Handbook of Metaethics
,
D. Copp and C. Rosati (eds.), Oxford: Oxford University Press.


Kumar, V., and R. Campbell, 2022, 
A Better Ape: The Evolution
of the Moral Mind and How It Made Us Human
, Oxford: Oxford
University Press.


Landy, J.F., and G.P. Goodwin, 2015, “Does Incidental
Disgust Amplify Moral Judgment? A Metaanalytic Review of Experimental
Evidence,” 
Perspectives on Psychological Science
, 10:
518–36.


Larmore, C., 2008, 
The Autonomy of Morality
, Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.


Lu, C., 2023, “Progress, Decolonization and Global Justice:
A Tragic View,” 
International Affairs (London)
, 99:
141–59.


Marx, K., 1845, 
The German Ideology
 (Part I), in

The Marx-Engels Reader
, R.C. Tucker (ed.), London: W.W.
Norton and Company, 1978.


–––, 1873, 
Capital
 (Volume One),
in 
The Marx-Engels Reader
, R.C. Tucker (ed.), London: W.W.
Norton and Company, 1978.


May, J., 2014, “Does Disgust Influence Moral Judgment?”

Australasian Journal of Philosophy
, 92: 125–41.


McCarthy, T., 2009, 
Race, Empire, and the Idea of Human
Development
, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.


Mercier, H., 2011, “What Good Is Moral Reasoning?”

Mind & Society
, 10: 131–48.


Møller, S., “Kant on Non-Linear Progress,”

Ethics & Politics
, 23: 127–47.


Moody-Adams, M., 2022, 
Making Space for Justice: Social
Movements, Collective Imagination, and Political Hope
, New York:
Columbia University Press.


–––, 2017, ﻿“﻿Moral Progress
and Human Agency,” 
Ethical Theory and Moral Practice
,
20: 153–68.


–––, 2002, 
Making Space for Justice: Social
Movements, Collective Imagination, and Political Hope
, New York:
Columbia University Press.


–––, 1999, “The Idea of Moral
Progress,” 
Metaphilosophy
, 30: 168–85.


Nagel, T., 2023, 
Moral Feelings, Moral Reality, and Moral
Progress
, Oxford: Oxford University Press.


Nichols, S., 2021, 
Rational Rules: Towards a Theory of Moral
Learning
, Oxford: Oxford University Press.


–––, 2004, 
Sentimental Rules: On the Natural
Foundations of Moral Judgment
, Oxford: Oxford University
Press.


Persson, I., and J. Savulescu, 2019, “The Evolution of Moral
Progress and Biomedical Moral Enhancement,” 
Bioethics
,
33: 814–19.


Plato, 
Statesman
, C.J. Rowe (trans.), in 
Plato:
Complete Works
, J. Cooper and D. Hutchinson (eds.), Indianapolis,
IN: Hackett, 1997.


﻿Posner, R., and P. Singer, 2001, “Animal Rights: A
Debate,” 
Slate
, June.


Prinz, J., 2007, 
The Emotional Construction of Morals
,
Oxford: Oxford University Press.


Richardson, H.S., et al., 2018, “Social Progress: A
Compass,” in 
Rethinking Society for the 21st Century
,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 41–80.


Quijano, A., 2000, “Coloniality of Power, Eurocentrism, and
Latin America,” 
Neplanta
: 
Views from the
South
, 1: 533–80.


Said, E.W., 1978, 
Orientalism
, New York: Vintage
Books.


Sauer, H., 2023, 
Moral Teleology: A Theory of Progress
,
New York: Taylor & Francis.


Singer, P., 2011, 
The Expanding Circle: Ethics, Evolution, and
Moral Progress
, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.


Tam, A., 2020, “Why Moral Reasoning Is Insufficient for
Moral Progress,” 
The Journal of Political Philosophy
,
28: 73–96.


Tilly, C., and S.G. Tarrow, 2015, 
Contentious Politics
,
second edition, Oxford: Oxford University Press.


Turgot, A., 1750, 
A Philosophical Review of the
Successive Advances of the Human Mind
, in 
Turgot on Progress,
Sociology and Economics
, R.L. Meek (ed.), Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1973.


–––, 1751, 
On Universal History
,
in 
Turgot on Progress, Sociology and Economics
, R.L. Meek
(ed.), Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1973.


Wood, A., 1991, “Unsociable Sociability: The Anthropological
Basis of Kantian Ethics,” 
Philosophical Topics
, 19:
325–51.


Young, I.M, 1990, 
Justice and the Politics of Difference
,
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.


Ypi, L., 2010, “Natura Daedala Rerum? On the Justification
of Historical Progress in Kant’s Guarantee of Perpetual
Peace,” 
Kantian Review
, 14: 103–35.








Academic Tools










How to cite this entry
.








Preview the PDF version of this entry
 at the
 
Friends of the SEP Society
.








Look up topics and thinkers related to this entry

 at the Internet Philosophy Ontology Project (InPhO).








Enhanced bibliography for this entry

at 
PhilPapers
, with links to its database.












Other Internet Resources




Sauer, H., et al., 2021,
 “
Moral Progress: Recent Developments
,”
 
Philosophy Compass
, 16(10): e12769-n/a. 


Richardson, H.S., et al., 2018,
 “
Social Progress: A Compass
,”
 in 
Rethinking Society for the 21st Century
, Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 41–80.








Related Entries




Adorno, Theodor W.
 |
 
critical theory
 |
 
Enlightenment
 |
 
Hegel, Georg Wilhelm Friedrich
 |
 
history, philosophy of
 |
 
Kant, Immanuel: social and political philosophy
 |
 
Marx, Karl
 |
 
moral realism
 |
 
moral relativism
 |
 
postmodernism
 |
 
scientific progress










 






Copyright © 2024
 by




Agnes Tam

<
agnes
.
tam
@
ucalgary
.
ca
>

Margaret Meek Lange

    




 









  Open access to the SEP is made possible by a world-wide funding initiative.

  Please Read How You Can Help Support the Growth and Development of the Encyclopedia




 

