











 
 Entry Navigation 






Entry Contents


Bibliography


Academic Tools


Friends PDF Preview 


Author and Citation Info 
 


Back to Top 


























Reference
First published Mon Jan 20, 2003; substantive revision Mon Feb 12, 2024





Reference is a relation that obtains between a variety of
representational tokens and objects or properties. For instance, when
I assert that “Barack Obama is a Democrat,” I use a
particular sort of representational token—i.e. the name
‘Barack Obama’—which refers to a particular
individual—i.e. Barack Obama. While names and other referential
terms are hardly the only type of representational token capable of
referring (consider, for instance, concepts, mental maps, and
pictures), linguistic tokens like these have long stood at the center
of philosophical inquiries into the nature of reference. Accordingly,
and to keep things to a reasonable length, this entry will focus
primarily on linguistic
 reference.
[
1
]



Assuming that at least some token linguistic expressions really do
refer, a number of interesting questions arise. How, for example, does
linguistic reference relate to the act of referring—something
that we as speakers 
do
 with referential terms? How exactly do
referential terms come to refer? That is, in virtue of what do they
refer to what they do? Is there a single answer to this question, a
single mechanism of reference, or different answers depending on the
sort of term in question—or even the circumstances in which a
single term is used? And what exactly is the relationship between
reference and meaning? Answers to these various questions will turn
out to be closely related, and the task of this entry will be to trace
out some of the main clusters of answers.








1. Introduction


2. Proper Names




2.1 Descriptivist Theories


2.2 Millian Heirs


2.3 Names with Multiple Bearers




3. Indexicals




3.1 Pure Indexicals


3.2 Impure Indexicals




4. Definite Descriptions


5. Four Models of Linguistic Reference


6. Nihilism, Particularism, and Pluralism


Bibliography


Academic Tools


Other Internet Resources


Related Entries










1. Introduction



We use language to talk about the world. Much of what we say about the
world appears to be meaningful; some of it is presumably even true.
For instance, I seem to be saying something true when, in the
appropriate sort of setting, I utter:




Barack Obama is a Democrat.





How do we manage to do such things? How, for instance, do I manage to
talk about Barack Obama and thereby say meaningful and true things
about him? In a word: how do I 
refer
 to Barack Obama by means
of the name ‘Barack Obama’? Metaphorically, we seem to be
capable of using language to talk about the world because some of our
words are themselves capable of ‘hooking onto’ things in
the world, things like Barack Obama. Proper names—that is,
expressions like ‘Barack Obama’ and ‘Mount
Kilimanjaro’—are widely regarded as paradigmatic referring
expressions. Although it may seem implausible to suppose that

all
 words refer, that all words somehow ‘hook
onto’ bits of reality, certain types of words are widely
presumed to be of the referring sort. These include: proper names,
pronouns, indexicals, demonstratives, plurals, natural kind terms, and
various other sorts of property terms. Definite descriptions are
another, though highly controversial, candidate. Here, we’ll
focus on just a subset of these—namely, what are often called
‘singular’ referential terms. These are terms that,
supposing they refer, refer to particular objects and individuals as
opposed to groups or properties. Since singular referential terms have
been subjected to intensive philosophical scrutiny over the past
hundred years, this will still leave us with plenty to discuss.



This article will focus on five closely related questions regarding
reference: (i) How does the reference relation that obtains between
token uses of terms and objects relate to the act of reference? In
other words, do terms refer to what they do in virtue of our using
them to do so, or do we use them to refer in virtue of their already
doing so? (ii) What are the meanings of referential terms? Are they
just referents, or rather something more? (iii) What is the mechanism
of reference? In other words, in virtue of what does a token use of a
referential term attach to a particular object/individual? (iv) Is
there a single mechanism of reference common to all referring terms,
or do different sorts of terms hook onto their referents in virtue of
different sorts of things? And (v) to what extent, if at all, can
reference depend on relatively private features of the speaker, such
as their intentions or other mental states?



Our goal here will be to map out how answers to these various
questions cluster together to generate several distinct pictures of
the nature and function of reference. To get there, we’ll start
in Section 2 by looking at two of the main approaches to proper names.
Then, in Section 3, we will turn to indexicals and demonstratives,
which put pressure on the thought that these two approaches represent
an exhaustive set of options. Section 4 will focus on definite
descriptions, which will serve to highlight some potential
deficiencies in the models of linguistic reference introduced in
Sections 2 and 3. Section 5 will step back to outline the main
clusters of positions we will have developed by that point. Finally,
Section 6 wraps up by canvassing some more radical positions, like
nihilism and pluralism about reference.



For the sake of both clarity and brevity, this entry will refrain from
venturing too deeply into the detailed debates regarding the meaning,
syntactic form, and function of the various terms we will be looking
at. Rather, we will focus instead on what, if anything, can be said
about the nature of linguistic reference 
in general
. For a
more detailed look at the idiosyncrasies of these various terms,
please see the entries on
 
names
,
 
descriptions
, and
 
indexicals
.
 See also the related entry on
 
natural kinds
.


2. Proper Names



Proper names have long taken center stage in debates about linguistic
reference. For present purposes, we’ll treat these as roughly
co-extensive with what ordinary (non-philosophically trained) speakers
standardly call ‘names’. So expressions like ‘Barack
Obama’, ‘Kyoto’, and ‘Mount Kilimanjaro’
will all count as proper names for our purposes. What do these
expressions have in common? In virtue of what do they constitute a
genuine class of linguistic expressions? At least at first glance,
these would appear to be syntactically simple expressions that refer,
or at least purport to refer, to particular objects or individuals.
Thus, ‘Barack Obama’ refers to a specific man,
‘Kyoto’ refers to a specific city, and ‘Mount
Kilimanjaro’ refers to a specific mountain. And, even though it
is questionable whether expressions such as ‘Santa Claus’
and ‘Sherlock Holmes’ actually refer to anything, there
can be no doubt that they at least purport to refer: to Santa Claus
and Sherlock Holmes, respectively. They are thus to be counted as
proper names as well for present purposes.



With respect to the reference of proper names, there are two basic
orientations that have long captured philosophers’ attention:
one that views names on the model of tags, and another that views them
on the model of descriptions. We’ll briefly survey these two
views, along with some complications that arise for each. Then
we’ll turn to a problem that arises for both sorts of view:
explaining how reference works for names with more than one
bearer.


2.1 Descriptivist Theories



According to descriptivist theories of proper names, a particular use
of a proper name refers when the descriptive content somehow
associated with that use suffices to pick out a specific object or
individual. On one standard way of working out this sort of view, one
associated with both Gottlob Frege (1892) and Bertrand Russell (1911),
the particular descriptive content associated with a given use of a
name is so associated because 
the speaker
 associates this
content with the name in question. For the use of the name to refer,
this descriptive content must uniquely determine the name’s
referent. So when a speaker uses the name ‘
N
’
and, in so doing, successfully refers to a particular object or
individual 
x
, this sort of descriptivist claims (i) that the
speaker must be thinking of 
N
 as the (unique) 
F
 and
(ii) that 
x
 must in fact be the (unique) 
F
. In other
words, this sort of ‘classical’ descriptivist posits that
referential success hinges on speakers attaching to each name in their
repertoire some descriptive content 
F
 which uniquely singles
out a specific object in the world. Conversely, when speakers fail to
associate a sufficiently precise description with a name, this sort of
descriptivist predicts that reference fails.



Classical descriptivists, like Frege and Russell, were perfectly
willing to acknowledge that the descriptive content in question might
vary, sometimes quite markedly, from one speaker to the next. Indeed,
according to Russell, such contents may vary across time for one and
the same speaker. Thus, while I might associate the name ‘David
Cameron’ with the descriptive content 
the U.K. Prime
Minister who called for a referendum on Brexit
, Samantha Cameron
might associate the same name with the descriptive content 
my
husband
. Had Cameron ultimately chosen not to call a referendum
on Brexit, my identifying content associated with ‘David
Cameron’ would presumably have been different. If David and
Samantha were to divorce, then Samantha’s identifying
description would no doubt change as well, perhaps to something like

my ex-husband
. In all of these cases, the individual referred
to by means of the name is determined (or, as it is often put, is
‘picked out’ or ‘fixed’) by the descriptive
content the speaker associates with that name. Because the descriptive
content in question is typically characterized by means of a definite
description (an expression of the form 
the F
), such theories
are often known as ‘descriptivist theories’ of proper
 names.
[
2
]



To get the intuitive appeal of descriptivism more clearly in view,
consider a case where we know two individuals named
‘Boris’, one of whom is a mutual friend who has never held
any elected office and the other of whom is the former Prime Minister
of the United Kingdom. Suppose now that I utter:




Boris likes to party.





If for some reason you are confused about who I am talking about, the
natural thing for you to do is to ask me “Which Boris do you
mean?” I might then respond “The former Prime Minister of
the U.K.,” and this seems to be dispositive of the facts here.
That is, supposing that this is the description I had in mind, then it
would seem that my utterance of (2) is genuinely 
about
 Boris
the former Prime Minister and not our mutual friend, the
non-politician Boris. Likewise, the truth or falsity of (2) would seem
to hinge on how things are with the former Prime Minister and not on
how things are with our mutual friend of the same name.



Some other appealing aspects of descriptivism become evident when we
pair the thesis considered above, a thesis about what determines
reference, with a natural companion thesis to the effect that the
descriptive contents associated with uses of names also provide their
token meanings. In other words, proper names may well refer, but they
only do so 
via
 their meanings—which are more like
definite descriptions. By adopting this further thesis, the
descriptivist can now explain a range of philosophically interesting
cases. So, consider:




Hesperus is Phosphorus.


Santa Claus lives at the North Pole.


Fred believes that Cicero, but not Tully, was Roman.





(3) is true, but it is not knowable 
apriori
. That is,
knowledge of (3) cannot be justified independent of experience. If the
meanings of these two names is just whatever they refer to, however,
then this looks puzzling. For then (3) would mean 
Jupiter is
Jupiter
, which is just an instance of the law of self-identity.
In other words, simply understanding the meaning of (3) would be
enough to know that it is true. According to meaning descriptivism, in
contrast, what (3) means is that two distinct descriptions are
satisfied by the same object. Given what the relevant descriptions are
likely to be here, this should only be knowable 
aposteriori
,
or on the basis of experience. Similarly, in (4) the meaning
descriptivist can explain the meaningfulnes of the sentence without
appeal to reference, by associating the name ‘Santa Claus’
with a description like 
the bearded, grandpa-like figure who runs
a dodgy elf labor camp in the far north
. And, finally, the
potential truth of (5) can be explained by noting that Fred might well
associate different descriptions with ‘Cicero’ and
‘Tully’, despite the fact that these names actually
co-refer.



The central challenge to the descriptivist theory is that there is
reason to suspect that proper names are not semantically equivalent to
definite descriptions. Saul Kripke (1972), in particular, argues that
names pick out the same object even when embedded under modal terms
like ‘might’, whereas definite descriptions typically
don’t do this. Returning to our earlier example of ‘David
Cameron’ and supposing that the description I associate with
Cameron is 
the U.K. Prime Minister who called for a referendum on
Brexit
, it seems that I can still truly assert:




David Cameron might not have called for a referendum on
Brexit.





If descriptivism is right about both meaning and reference, however,
then (6) should be equivalent to:




It might have been the case that: the U.K. Prime Minister who
called for a referendum on Brexit did not call for a referendum on
Brexit.





Granted, (7) is not really a claim of ordinary English. Still, holding
fixed that we are talking about 
metaphysical
 rather than

epistemic
 possibility here, it should be clear enough that
(7) is false: if there is someone who satisfies the description
‘the U.K. Prime Minister who was called for a referendum on
Brexit’ in whatever possible situation we are considering, then
that individual called for a referendum on Brexit in that same
possible situation.



In more ordinary English, there is a way of hearing something along
the lines of (7) as true: assuming that we are talking about the Prime
Minister who 
actually
 called for a referendum on Brexit, of
course they might not have. But that is not how definite descriptions
are typically assumed to function; rather, they are typically
understood to be flexible, or 
non-rigid
 across the space of
possibility, picking out whatever happens to satisfy them in whatever
possible situation we are considering. So, if the descriptivist is to
avail themself of this sort of defensive maneuver, as some have been
tempted to, then they will have to motivate the claim that names are
semantically equivalent not to definite descriptions 
per se
,
but rather to ‘actualized’ or ‘rigidified’
versions
 thereof.
[
3
]



This challenge can be avoided by a descriptivist who is willing to
give up on the claim that the meaning of a proper name, on a given
occasion, is equivalent to a definite description. In that case, an
associated description will fix reference relative to the actual
world, and then that referent is what is relevant to determining the
truth of modal statements. This response, however, requires giving up
on the nice explanations of (3)–(5) that the meaning
descriptivist was able to provide. What’s more, even this more
minimal version of descriptivism runs into a different problem also
raised by Kripke, what is often called the ‘semantic’
objection to descriptivism.



This objection runs as follows: often, we don’t associate enough
information with a name to pick out any particular individual.
Nonetheless, we seem to be capable of using that name to refer to a
specific individual. Kripke offers as an example the name
‘Feynman’. Ordinary folks, Kripke claims, might know that
Feynman was a physicist, but they will not know anything besides the
name that would serve to differentiate Feynman from any other
physicist they have heard of. An indefinite description like 
a
physicist
 will not suffice, however, to pick out any particular
individual in the world. Even 
a physicist named
‘Feynman’
 won’t do, at least in a world where
two physicists bear this name. At best, this sort of description will
pick out an arbitrary member of a class of individuals, not the right
one consistently. And yet, as Kripke points out, it seems perfectly
coherent for someone who knows nothing about Feynman, who has only
overheard someone else using the name, to say to themself “I
wonder who Feynman is,” or to ask their friend “Who is
Feynman?” In each of these cases, the natural thing to say is
that the speaker is using the name ‘Feynman’ to wonder or
ask about Feynman. How they manage to do so, however, looks to be
something that is going to be very difficult for the descriptivist to
explain—assuming (i) that they want to maintain the link between
associated descriptions and the information available to individual
speakers, and (ii) that they are unwilling to rely on descriptions
like 
whoever the person I overheard this name from was using it to
talk about
.



Before moving on, it is worth briefly noting that some descriptivists
have indeed been tempted to defend the theory by giving up on the link
mentioned in (i). P.F. Strawson (1959), for instance, suggests that
speakers may rely on others to provide the relevant descriptive
content, the content that serves to hook a given use of a name onto an
object or individual in the world. In fact, Strawson allows that
groups can effectively use names to refer so long as there is at least
one expert among them for whom for whom the following holds: when we
pool expert opinion, a plurality of the the descriptions they
associate with the relevant name are true of a single object. This
will effectively deal with Kripke’s Feynman case, but at an
intuitive cost. For now the descriptivist has not only forfeited their
ability to explain (3)–(5), they have also risked making it the
case that speakers will have no special access to who or what they are
talking about when using a name. If speakers regularly lack sufficient
information to identify the referent of their use of a proper name,
then it is highly unclear why we would be justified in relying on them
to answer questions like “Which 
N
 were you talking
about?” Some may be tempted to pay this price. Others may be
tempted to try to integrate bits and pieces of descriptivism into
theories which are otherwise anti-descriptivist. In fact, this latter
option has proven a popular one, and much of what follows can be
viewed as a study in how this strategy has played out with respect to
different sorts of referential terms.


2.2 Millian Heirs



The primary alternative to the descriptivist theory of names has
typically gone by the name of ‘Millianism’. According to
this view, which dates back to John Stuart Mill (1867), a name’s
meaning is simply its referent. In its modern form, the view was
introduced by Ruth Barcan Marcus (1961), who proposed that we ought to
conceive of proper names as ‘tags’. To say that proper
names are tags is, for Marcus, to say that they have no linguistic
meaning beyond their reference. Proper names do not, on this sort of
view, refer by way of the descriptions they allegedly stand for.
Rather, they refer 
directly
, as it is sometimes put, to their
bearers. Important consequences of this theory include, as Marcus
notes, the necessity of identity statements between co-referring
proper names—something which, though highly intuitive, is not
guaranteed by most descriptivist theories of proper
 names.
[
4
]

 Other important consequences include the dissolution of puzzles
involving substitutivity in modal contexts (Marcus 1993).



Of course, saying that names function as tags—or that they are
‘directly referential’—is not to provide a full
theory of names. That requires, in addition, an explanation of what
makes a name the particular tag that it is. In other words, we need to
specify what it is, if not an associated description, that fixes the
reference of a name in a context. Put slightly differently, the claim
that names function as tags effectively furnishes us with a

semantics
 for names. What remains, is to provide a

metasemantics
 for names, a theory that tells us which
semantic value should be associated with each name, or each name on a
given occasion of use, and why.



The most popular option has been to pair a Millian semantics with a
metasemantic picture adumbrated at roughly the same time by Peter
Geach (1969), Keith Donnellan (1970), and the aforementioned Kripke
(1972). Typically called the ‘causal theory of reference’,
the central idea developed in these works is that (the use of) a name
refers to whatever is linked to it in the appropriate way—a way
that does not require speakers to associate any identifying
descriptive content whatsoever with the name. The causal theory is
generally presented as having two components: one dealing with
reference fixing, the other dealing with reference borrowing.
Reference, on this sort of view, is fixed by a dubbing. In other
words, a language user 
gives a name
 to an object by saying
something like “You are to be called 
N
.” The
paradigm case is one where the dubber is occurrently perceiving the
target object when they utter this. After this initial act of
reference-fixing, the name gets passed on from speaker to speaker
through communicative exchanges. Speakers succeed in referring to
something by means of its name, on this sort of view, because
underlying their uses of the name are links in a causal chain
stretching back to the initial dubbing of the object with that name.
Subsequent speakers thus effectively ‘borrow’ their
reference from speakers earlier in the chain, though borrowers
needn’t be able to identify any of the lenders they are in fact
relying on. All that is required is that borrowers are appropriately
linked to their lenders through chains of communication.



As Kripke points out, complications arise due to the fact that we can
apparently re-use names. So, I may have come across the name
‘Napoleon’ via a chain of use leading back to the most
famous of French generals. Having heard the name, I may now decide to
call the hedgehog who lives in my front garden, and who likes to
imperiously survey her domain, ‘Napoleon’. When I use the
name in this way, Kripke claims, that I have introduced a new name, or
at least a new use of the name. This, Kripke claims, is due to my
intentions—specifically, my intention to dub this hedgehog with
the name ‘Napoleon’ as opposed to using that name as I
always have before. Still, there is obviously a real sense in which I
inherited the name from a historical tradition that traces back to
18th century France. So not every sort of causal connection to
previous use suffices to preserve a chain of reference borrowing,
according to the causal theorist. Some connections will suffice to
pass on reference, whereas others are irrelevant. Providing a
convincing account of the details here has proven to be a non-trivial
 task.
[
5
]


2.3 Names with Multiple Bearers



So far, we have generally proceeded as though names were univocal. But
that hardly seems right. As we already saw, a name like
‘Boris’ can refer equally well to the former British Prime
Minister and to anyone else whose parents decided to call them this,
regardless of their politics. Likewise, once I’ve named the
hedgehog in my garden ‘Napoleon’, it would seem that the
name ‘Napoleon’ can be used equally well to talk about
either the greatest of French generals or, alternatively, this
particular hedgehog. Classical descriptivists have no real trouble
accounting for this, since each time a name is used, its reference is
essentially fixed anew by whatever description the speaker happens to
have in mind. In other words, according to this sort of descriptivist,
it is really only a matter of happenstance that uses of names ever
co-refer. That might seem a rather large bullet to bite. On the other
hand, once we move away from classical descriptivism, explaining how
names can refer to different individuals in different circumstances
becomes significantly more challenging.



Consider a descriptivist in the Strawsonian mold, one for whom an
utterance of the name ‘
N
’ refers in accord with
the plurality of the beliefs of the relevant experts. What are we to
do with a name like ‘Boris’ then, which can refer to
either the former British Prime Minister or to our mutual friend? We
cannot simply aggregate all the relevant beliefs associated with this
name, considered as an orthographic or phonological form, and then see
who or what the plurality of those beliefs picks out. For that would
leave us only ever able to use the name to refer to one or the other
of these Borises, and that hardly seems like the right thing to say.
It seems, therefore, that a descriptivist of this sort will have to
think about names in some more fine-grained manner. Yet this will not
prove easy. They cannot simply go back to appealing to the information
the speaker happens to have to do the job, for we can easily imagine
someone who seems capable of refering to either Boris and yet lacks
sufficient information to distinguish the one from the other.



Similar issues arise for the Millian. Here, however, some concrete
proposals have been floated. For instance, David Kaplan (1990) has
argued that, against all appearances, names really do have only one
referent apiece. In fact, Kaplan suggests that we should think of
names as individuated, in part, by their referents. In other words, on
Kaplan’s view, one cannot simply ‘read off’ which
name has been used from its overt phonological or orthographic form.
Rather, Kaplan posits that there are any number of names all written
and pronounced ‘Boris’, or even ‘Boris
Johnson’. While each of these names is written and pronounced
identically, each refers to a different person. The question now
becomes: what determines 
which name
 a speaker has used in a
given context? Kaplan suggests that the answer to this question has to
do with the speaker’s mental states, and in particular with the
speaker’s intention to talk about one or another individual. In
effect, Kaplan takes it that hearing a name leaves us with a mental
trace, a mental analogue of a linguistic name, that directly refers to
some particular individual. By looking to see which trace shows up in
the speaker’s intentions, we come to know the referential
properties of the utterance or inscription being used to express this
mental trace.



Kaplan’s theory has some rather odd consequences, however. For
instance, it turns out that no two people actually ever share a
name—for names come complete with their referential
 features.
[
6
]

 Kaplan suggests that what people share are not names but rather some
common aspects of how their names tend to be externalized. In other
words, for Kaplan, what it is to share a name with someone else is for
both of your names to belong to the same class of phonological and/or
orthographic forms. Kaplan calls these ‘generic names’, as
opposed to the ‘common currency names’ which, for him, are
the bearers of semantic properties like reference.



Finding themselves dissatisfied with Kaplan’s proposal here,
other direct reference theorists have opted for different responses to
the problem of names with multiple bearers. For instance, both
Francois Recanati (1997) and Michael Pelczar and Joe Rainsbury (1998)
have suggested that names ought to be treated on the model of
indexicals, a sort of term that we will consider in more detail
shortly. Briefly though, the suggestion runs: there is one and only
one name ‘Boris’, but context makes clear to which
individual a particular utterance of this name refers. In effect, the
proposal preserves something of the causal theory—by allowing
that baptisms and passings-on of names are the right sort of thing to
determine the set of possible referents associated with a name at any
given time—while appealing to some further feature of the
context to do the work of selecting an individual from this set. In
contrast to the pure indexicals like ‘I’ or
‘here’, however, there is no obvious candidate for which
aspect of the context serves to make this selection. Things get worse
still once we consider contexts in which multiple people bearing the
same name are all present and being talked about in the course of a
single utterance (e.g. “I never would have expected Boris and
Boris to get on so
 well.”).
[
7
]

 Alternatively, one might posit that names somehow function more like
the true demonstratives ‘this’ and ‘that’,
though obviously the details of such a suggestion would need to be
worked out.



To better understand these last two proposals, we first need to get
clearer on how reference works for in the case of indexicals and
demonstratives. In the next section, we will work to fill in this
gap.


3. Indexicals



We have now seen two basic models of how words refer to things. On the
descriptivist model, words refer by being associated, somehow, with a
description that serves to isolate a particular object as the
referent. By varying how we associate the relevant descriptions with
particular uses of words, we derive different versions of
descriptivism. On the causal-perceptual model, in contrast, words are
associated with chains of use leading back to some original act of
dubbing. That act itself then serves to bridge the gap between word
and world. While both these models were developed with names in mind,
we should ask ourselves “Can either serve to explain linguistic
reference 
in general
? That is, can either model plausibly
extend to other sorts of referential terms, beyond just
names?”



To answer this question, and ultimately to introduce a third distinct
model of linguistic reference, we turn now to the indexicals: words
like ‘I’, ‘you’, ‘here’,
‘now’, ‘he’, ‘she’,
‘this’, and ‘that’. As we will soon see, it is
hardly clear that all indexicals refer in the same way. In particular,
a distinction has often been drawn between what are called
‘pure’ and ‘impure’ indexicals, with rather
different theories of reference being offered for each. The challenges
that arise in trying to offer accounts of the impure indexicals will
bring us back to one of the questions with which we began: namely, do
words refer because we use them to do so, or rather do we use them to
do so because they already refer?


3.1 Pure Indexicals



What are pure indexicals? Roughly, these are expressions the reference
of which appears to co-vary with certain very regular aspects of the
contexts in which they are used. Here, ‘context’ should be
understood as including, 
inter alia
, a speaker, hearer, time,
and place. In contrast, the reference of ‘impure’
indexicals is supposed to be more difficult to characterize in terms
of picking out some distinct, repeatable feature of a context. Both
the existence and the significance of this distinction are
controversial (see the entry on
 
indexicals

 for further discussion). That said, assuming that there is such a
distinction, it is widely held that ‘I’,
‘here’, ‘now’ are pure indexicals, whereas
‘this’, ‘that’, ‘he’,
‘she’, and ‘it’ are impure. ‘You’
is perhaps the most active locus of dispute (see Radulescu
(2018)).



The traditional approach to indexicals, dating back once more to Frege
and Russell, has it that the reference of such expressions is fixed by
some sort of descriptive content associated by the speaker with the
expression. This reference-fixing description is the meaning of a
given utterance of the expression. The motivation for such a view is
largely intuitive. Indexicals must mean something, and their meanings
presumably have something to do with how these expressions refer. So
it is not too much of a stretch to think that ‘I’ might
mean something like 
the speaker of this utterance
 and refer
to that individual. Similarly, ‘now’ might mean 
the
time of this utterance
 and refer to that time. And so on.



One obvious objection to this view is that what the term
‘I’ refers to does not appear to be sensitive to whatever
sort of descriptive content a speaker happens to associate with that
term. For instance, the fact that I might happen to associate the
description 
the 44th President of the United States
 with the
term ‘I’ does not mean that I can somehow succeed in using
the term ‘I’ to refer to Barack Obama. Another problem
with this view, discussed extensively in Kaplan (1989b), is that
taking these reference-determining descriptions to be a part of what
we assert when we use indexicals can lead to our making some rather
odd predictions. Consider an assertive utterance of:




I like to ride my bicycle.





Suppose, first, that I am the speaker. I utter (8). Now, suppose that
you are the speaker. You utter (8). While there may be a loose sense
in which we ‘said the same thing’ with our utterances,
there is another, stricter sense in which we clearly did not. I said
something about myself, whereas you said something about yourself.
Yet, according to the classical descriptivist, we’ve both said
the very same thing. Namely, we’ve both asserted that the
speaker likes to ride their bicycle. All that differs is the context
in which we asserted this.



Now, to be clear, there are ways of tinkering with the view to avoid
both these objections. Some, like Hans Reichenbach (1947) or more
recently Manuel García-Carpintero (1998) and John Perry (2001),
have argued that indexicals are ‘token reflexives’,
meaning that the descriptions that should be associated with them will
need to involve explicit reference to the utterance of that very token
use of the term. So, for instance, the description for ‘I’
might be: the speaker of this very token of ‘I’. Since
different tokens will be involved when each of us utters (8),
we’ll no longer be asserting the very same thing. If we add
that, for token indexicals at least, the relevant descriptions
aren’t under the speaker’s control, but are rather
associated with particular terms via the rules of language, then we
can avoid our earlier objection as well.



A different sort of approach was developed by Reichenbach’s
student, the aforementioned David Kaplan. Kaplan (1989b) took many of
the same elements that Reichenbach was working with, but put them into
a framework where the meaning of an indexical in context—that
is, its contribution to what is said or asserted—is just an
object. According to Kaplan, we need to distinguish between two types
of meaning, which he called ‘character’ and
‘content’. Content is basically what we have been calling
meaning to this point; it is what the utterance of an individual term
contributes to what is said or asserted by an utterance of the
complete sentence of which it is a part. Character, on the other hand,
is more akin to a rule of use; a character tells us, for any given
context, what the content of a given expression is. Names, on
Kaplan’s way of thinking about them, have constant characters:
in any two arbitrary contexts, uses of the same name will be mapped to
the same referent (recall that Kaplan thinks of names in a
fine-grained way, such that they are never shared). The rule for any
name ‘
N
’ thus turns out to be: in any context
whatsoever, return 
N
 as the referent. Not so for terms like
‘I’ or ‘here’, which Kaplan takes to be
associated with rules like 
return the speaker
 and 
return
the location of the utterance
. So in a context where I am
speaking in Foyle’s, my utterances of ‘I’ and
‘here’ will refer to me and to Foyle’s,
respectively. When Nat is speaking at the American Bar, his utterances
of ‘I’ and ‘here’ will refer to Nat and to the
American Bar.



Importantly, the characters of the pure indexicals are supposed to be
insensitive to speakers’ mental states. That rules out any
possibility of my using the term ‘I’ to refer to Barack
Obama. Nor are your and my utterances of (8) predicted to say the same
thing. What’s more, as Kaplan points out, the view allows us to
productively distinguish between ‘metaphysical’ necessity
and what Kaplan calls ‘logical’ necessity. The sentence
“I am here now,” Kaplan claims, represents a logical
necessity: in virtue of what the indexicals ‘I’,
‘here’, and ‘now’ all mean, this sentence
cannot be uttered falsely. Yet clearly it is not metaphysically
necessary that a particular speaker be wherever they happen to be at
the time of utterance; they could just as easily have been somewhere
 else.
[
8
]



Now we have three basic models of reference on the table: the
descriptivist model, the causal-perceptual model, and the character
model. With the last of these in view, we can clarify an important
aspect of the indexical theory of names that was discussed at the end
of the last section. Essentially, that theory proposed to hybridize
our second and third models. Instead of names having constant
characters, as Kaplan would have it, the proposal is to assign them
more interesting ones. For instance, we might try stipulating that the
context, in addition to containing a speaker, place, time, etc., must
also include a most salient individual bearing a given name. Names,
the idea runs, always refer to their most salient bearer at a context.
Since names no longer have constant characters, they are more like
indexicals than we might initially have thought. On the other hand, we
can preserve a good deal of the causal theory by re-characterizing it
as a theory about who counts as a name-bearer in a given
 context.
[
9
]



This way of developing the indexical theory is not without its
downsides, however. For instance, it hardly seems to be true that we
always use names to refer to the most salient bearer of that name in a
context, particularly once we consider utterances of names prefixed
with phrases like ‘the other’ (e.g. “The other David
is not here yet, though I can hear him down the hall.”).
What’s more, there is reason to worry that embracing this sort
of indexical theory entails giving up on one of the purported
advantages of the causal theory: its ability to explain how it is that
we can pass on the capacity to think about objects merely by passing
on names for those objects. Since names are causally anchored to the
objects they name, according to the causal theory, acquiring a new
name should suffice to put us in causal contact with the object named.
On the indexical theory of names, on the other hand, we do not pass on
names for things; rather, we use names to refer to the most salient
bearer of those names in a given context. Perhaps this suffices to
pass on a 
use
 of a name—loaded, as it were, with a
referent—where the listener doesn’t already have that use
in their repertoire. But if the listener fails to have this use in
their repertoire, then it becomes hard to see how the referent of that
use could count as the most salient bearer of the relevant name in the
context.


3.2 Impure Indexicals



In contrast to the pure indexicals, the reference of deictic uses of
pronouns like ‘he’, ‘she’, and
‘it’ and true demonstratives like ‘this’ and
‘that’ looks to be far less amenable to an analysis in
terms of character. After all, what regular feature of a speech
context might any of these terms serve to pick out? One option would
be to say that tokens of each of these simply refer to 
the
demonstratum
 of the context. But not only does that threaten to
force us to say that all of these terms effectively mean the same
thing—something which seems rather counterintuitive—now we
also need to know what exactly serves to make something the
demonstratum in a context. And what are we to do when multiple such
terms, or multiple instances of the same term, are used within the
span of a single utterance? Are we really to believe that contexts
involve not just a demonstratum role, but also a 
first
demonstratum
 role, a 
second demonstratum
 role, etc.?



A number of possible responses arise at this point. First, following
Kaplan (1978) and Colin McGinn (1981), we might try to take advantage
of the fact that uses of these terms are often accompanied by
ostensive gestures. The picture this suggests is: the reference of a
use of a demonstrative (and, presumably, the other impure indexicals
as well) is determined by the accompanying ostensive gesture.
Formally, we might treat these gestures as determining the first
demonstratum, second demonstratum, etc. But we might equally well
choose not to. Unfortunately, this approach faces two rather obvious
objections: first, even fairly directed pointing gestures can usually
be disambiguated in a number of different ways; and, second, many
perfectly good uses of demonstratives simply aren’t accompanied
by any sort of ostensive gesture. The first of these problems invites
a simple solution: appeal to the speaker’s intentions to
disambiguate the gesture. That move, in turn, invites the question:
why not just appeal directly to these ‘directing
intentions’ and leave the physical aspect of the gesture to the
side? We will return to that option shortly.



The latter objection invites a rather different response: perhaps it
is not the ostensive gesture itself that makes an object the
demonstratum, but rather what that gesture does. Gestures, we might
take it, serve to make objects salient in a context. This leads us to
a second sort of view about what makes an object the demonstratum of a
particular utterance of an impure indexical: whatever object is the
most salient in the context at the time of utterance, that is the
demonstratum. Howard Wettstein (1984) and Allyson Mount (2008) have
each developed views along these lines, the basic idea being that an
utterance of a term like ‘she’ refers to whoever counts as

the most salient woman in the context
 and with similar rules
applying to the other impure indexicals. More problematic are bare
uses of ‘this’ and ‘that’, which don’t
seem to contain any substantive information about the relevant sortal.
This means that we need to posit that contexts in which these terms
refer contain not just a most salient woman, but a most salient object
full stop. What might serve to make an object maximally salient

simpliciter
? The natural suggestion would seem to be: our
mutual interests and perspective.



Dialectically, this suggestion is problematic. For, as Eliot
Michaelson and Ethan Nowak (2022) point out, the interests and
perspective of the speaker and listener can easily diverge. One option
here would be to claim that, in cases of divergence, one of these
perspectives (i.e. the speaker’s or listener’s)
systematically trumps the other. Opting for either of these, however,
invites the question of whether we can dispense with the notion of
salience entirely and make do instead with how the privileged agent
construes the relevant term, regardless of whatever happens to be
salient to them at the moment. In essence, the worry is that the view
might well collapse into either a speaker intention-type view or a
listener-construal type one. The natural way of trying to avoid such a
collapse would be to claim that reference simply fails when no one
object is mutually maximally salient. This is the route that Mount
advocates taking. As she notes, this way of going entails that a great
many seemingly meaningful and felicitous uses of ‘this’
and ‘that’ fail to refer. For instance, the view entails
that reference fails whenever the speaker uses the term
‘this’ but the listener can’t hear them, is
distracted, etc. While Mount is prepared to accept this result, few
others have been enthusiastic about this prospect.



For those not so inclined, a third possible response presents itself.
According to Kaplan (1989a), token uses of the impure indexicals, like
demonstratives and deictic uses of pronouns, refer to whomever or
whatever the speaker intends for them to refer to—at least for
‘perceptual’ uses of such terms, or uses where the speaker
is occurrently perceiving their target. Let us leave this hedge aside,
however, and allow that such intentions might be grounded in memory
traces, the conversational record, or what have you. With
perceptually-grounded uses of demonstratives, this directing intention
might well be thought of as the internal analogue of an externalized
pointing. But the move inside makes this picture more durable: no
explicit gesture is necessary for reference to succeed, and no longer
are we limited to using the impure indexicals just to refer to objects
in our physical and temporal vicinity. Since we do indeed use impure
indexicals to refer to physically and temporally distant objects, this
looks like a significant advantage for a generalized
‘intentionalist’ approach to demonstrative reference.



None of this is to say that Kaplan’s view has been universally
embraced. On the contrary, the view is generally thought to face a
rather serious problem. We noted above that terms like the bare
demonstratives ‘this’ and ‘that’ look to be
rather flexible in their application. Yet even these terms are
presumably not 
infinitely
 flexible. For instance, you
presumably cannot point directly and deliberately at a picture of
Boris Johnson, utter (9), and succeed in using the term
‘that’ to refer to the picture of David Kaplan that you
have tucked away in your desk drawer for just such occasions:




That is a picture of one of the most Hawaiian shirt-loving
philosophers of the twentieth century.





This is an instance of what has sometimes been called the
‘Humpty Dumpty
 Problem’.
[
10
]

 Basically, any time we might be tempted to suggest that what token
uses of some particular term mean or refer to depends on the
speaker’s intentions, the following sort of problem inevitably
arises: unless we impose some constraints on what those intentions can
look like and still prove effective, we end up having to say that
speakers with sufficiently-bent intentions can mean or refer to some
highly unexpected things by means of their utterances, things that,
intuitively, it does not seem possible to mean or refer to with
utterances of the relevant terms.



A closely related case, oddly enough from an earlier time-slice of
Kaplan (i.e. Kaplan 1978) and used there to help motivate the
ostention theory, can be used to help bring out the issue here.
Imagine a scenario where the speaker is sitting at their desk and
their prized picture of Rudolf Carnap, which typically hangs on the
wall behind them, has been switched for a picture of Spiro Agnew.
Having failed to notice the switch, and intending to use the term
‘that’ to refer to their picture of Carnap, the speaker
points behind themself, directly at the picture of Agnew, and utters
(10):




That is a picture of one of the greatest philosophers of the
twentieth century.





According to Kaplan, (10) is false not in virtue of the utterance of
‘that’ failing to refer, but rather because the speaker
has asserted something false about the actual picture hanging behind
them, the picture of
 Agnew.
[
11
]

 Note that this case differs from (9) in an important respect: in
(10), it doesn’t seem altogether implausible that the speaker
here might 
also
 have intended for their use of
‘that’ to refer to whatever picture is hanging behind
them. After all, they are somehow confused about which picture that
is. This confusion would seem to offer the intentionalist additional
room to maneuver.



In fact, intentionalists have gone several different ways here: Alex
Radulescu (2019) has embraced the claim that the token uses of
‘that’ in (9) and (10) do refer to the pictures of Kaplan
and Carnap, respectively. Most intentionalists, however, have not been
so bold. Instead, they have either tried to restrict the range of
intentions that serve to fix reference, or else they have tried to
limit when speakers’ intentions in fact determine reference.
This first strategy has generally proceeded by appealing to certain
considerations drawn from Paul Grice’s (1957) theory of meaning.
The second, in contrast, has tended to try to derive the relevant
constraints from the standing meanings of, or rules of use for, the
impure indexicals and demonstratives. More recently, a few
philosophers have also tried combining these two approaches.



The Gricean approach to reference was first clearly articulated by
Gail Stine (1978), though it had been alluded to by both Grice himself
and Keith Donnellan
 (1968).
[
12
]

 The basic idea is that the relevant sorts of intentions for fixing
the reference of impure indexicals are, properly speaking, intentions
aimed at getting the listener to identify a particular object as the
referent. In keeping with Grice’s broader theory of meaning,
these intentions are posited to be even more complex than this: not
only are they aimed at getting the listener to identify some object as
the referent, they are also meant to be fulfilled in part on the basis
of the listener’s recognizing the speaker’s intention for
them to do so.



Having followed the Gricean line this far, now we must ask: can the
Gricean thesis regarding the complexity of referential intentions
somehow cut off the threat of a collapse into Humpty Dumpty-ism? The
answer, according to the Gricean, is “Yes.” Griceans are
likely to claim that the speaker lacks a genuinely referential
intention in a case like (9), since they should have no expectation
that their listener will be in a position to recover their intended
referent. In a case like (10), however, it looks like the speaker

does
 have an intention for their listener to recover the
picture of Carnap as the referent. What then is the Gricean to do?
Kent Bach (1992) helpfully suggests the following refinement to the
view: while genuinely referential, the speaker’s intention to
refer to the picture of Carnap runs 
via
 an intention to refer
to whatever picture happens to be behind them. That latter intention
is meant to be recognized directly, whereas the former can be
recognized only indirectly, via the recognition of both this latter
intention and (in the good case) the fact that the picture behind the
speaker actually is the picture of Carnap. A better way of formulating
the Gricean thesis with regards to referential intentions, Bach
claims, reflects this sort of asymmetry: when there is a conflict
between a direct and an indirect referential intention, and both are
genuinely referential, it is the direct intention that serves to fix
 reference.
[
13
]



So far, so good for the Gricean. But just how general is their
solution to the Humpty Dumpty Problem? Can they, for instance, account
for a speaker who appears to be fully competent in a language like
English, but who mistakenly believes that everyone else can simply
read off their referential intentions, directly? In other words,
consider a speaker who believes that the listener can read their mind
regarding their referential intentions, though nothing else, and only
when they utter a demonstrative. Unless we regard such a speaker as
incompetent with the English language, it would seem that they can now
succeed, according to the Gricean, in making a token of
‘this’ or ‘that’ refer to whatever they like,
on any occasion whatsoever. For this speaker can coherently intend for
their listener to recover that object as the referent of their use of
the demonstrative, partly in virtue of directly recognizing this very
intention, regardless of what that object is. In other words, given
some sufficiently strange background beliefs, the Gricean predicts
that a speaker really can make a use of ‘that’ in an
utterance like (9) refer to their picture of David
Kaplan—regardless of whether anyone short of a real clairvoyant
would be capable of recovering this referent. So the Gricean strategy
for blocking intentionalism’s collapse into Humpty Dumpty-ism
doesn’t fully generalize.



Partly in response to worries like these, we might think that the
right sort of response to the Humpty Dumpty Problem is not to up the
complexity of referential intentions themselves, but rather to impose
limits on how particular sorts of terms—even the true
demonstratives—can be used to refer. Marga Reimer (1991, 1992)
offers a suggestion along just these lines: 
when
 uses of the
demonstratives ‘this’ and ‘that’ are
accompanied by ostensive gestures, then the referent itself must lie
in the general direction indicated by that
 gesture.
[
14
]

 When there is no gesture, then there is no such constraint. In other
words, Reimer re-emphasizes the apparently special connection between
demonstratives and gestures that earlier theorists tried to leverage
into a full theory of demonstrative-reference. This time, however,
Reimer suggests that we use this connection not to generate a complete
theory of demonstrative reference, but rather to impose some
constraints on the intentionalist theory. Those constraints, in turn,
are what allows Reimer to make the intuitively correct predictions
regarding (9) and (10): with respect to (9), she will say that one
cannot succeed at pointing to one picture and referring to another
picture, unless perhaps the first is a photograph of the second; with
respect to (10), she will say that the speaker intends 
both

to refer to the picture behind herself and to that of Carnap, but only
one of these satisfies the constraint associated with the gesture.
Thus, only one of these intentions is in a position to determine
reference.



To be clear, Reimer’s position is by no means incompatible with
the Gricean theory of referential intentions. One might, in fact,
accept both that there are substantive constraints on reference that
derive from the meanings of the impure indexicals themselves, and also
that referential intentions are as the Gricean describes them to be.
Bach (2017) has recently embraced such a view, for instance. That
said, one should demand an independent reason for adopting the Gricean
thesis. For the Gricean thesis has often been advertized as a response
to the Humpty Dumpty Problem, but Reimer-esque constraints allow the
intentionalist to avoid such a collapse independent of adopting the
Gricean thesis and, as we have seen, the Gricean thesis alone is not
sufficient. What’s more, as Michaelson (2022) has argued, the
Gricean picture of referential intentions comes at a cost: it makes it
difficult, if not impossible, to explain how speakers can obfuscate
with referential terms. That is, it makes it difficult to explain how
speakers can seemingly refer to one thing with the use of a
referential term while simultaneously intending for their listener to
misinterpret their utterance. Still, given the enduring appeal of
Gricean theories of meaning, it is undoubtedly too soon to write off
the Gricean theory of reference.



The fourth and final view of demonstrative reference that we will
consider starts with the contention that we took a wrong turn at the
outset by giving up on the idea that what a demonstrative refers to is
just the demonstratum of the context. According to Una Stojnić,
Matthew Stone, and Ernie Lepore (2013, 2017), demonstratives refer to
whatever is at the ‘center of attention’ in the discourse.
This might sound a bit like the salience theories we considered above,
but for Stojnić et al., what is at the center of attention is
determined purely linguistically. Sometimes this determination is due
to earlier discourse and, in particular, the sorts of discourse
relations that these authors take to be grammatically encoded in our
utterances. At other times, the object at the center of attention will
be determined by a gesture, which Stojnić et al. take to have a
logical form of their own. As Nowak and Michaelson (2020) point out,
however, this latter claim leaves Stojnić et al. needing to
somehow disambiguate pointing gestures, just as the ostention theorist
did.



What’s more, the view faces a different sort of challenge as
well. Consider a discourse-initial, gestureless use of demonstratives
like:




That was unexpected.





If I utter (11) to Clayton, sitting in stunned silence the morning
after the election of Donald Trump, it seems plausible that I will
have both said something true about the election result and managed to
communicate this to Clayton. Yet since the utterance is
discourse-initial, there is nothing in the prior conversation to set
the center of attention. Likewise, since there is no gesture, that
cannot be what determines the center of attention here. Instead,
Stojnić et al. propose to treat utterances like (11) as,
essentially, complex quantified statements; what (11) says is
something like 
there is some pair of events such that the one
summarizes the other and has something unexpected as its center
.
In effect, Stojnić et al. propose a theory on which most uses of
demonstratives succeed in referring as a matter of grammar, but
discourse-initial, gestureless uses of demonstratives simply do not
refer at all. And likewise for the other impure indexicals.


4. Definite Descriptions



In contrast to the sorts of terms we have considered so far, the
primary question regarding definite descriptions—complex
expressions like ‘the biscuit’ or ‘the
off-license’—is not how they refer, but whether they refer
at all.



Both Alexius Meinong (1904) and Frege (1892) thought that they did.
That left them with a problem, however, since the overt descriptive
material found in definite descriptions is typically insufficient to
identify a single object as the referent. For Frege, at least, there
was a fairly obvious solution: treat that overt descriptive material
as just a part of the sense of the definite description, allowing more
material to be added by whatever fuller description the speaker
happens to have in mind. Faced with this same set of issues, Russell
(1905) took the opposite tack: he posited that descriptions simply do
not refer. Rather, what he offered was a translation procedure for
sentences of the form ‘The A is B’, which he posited to
mean: there is one and only one A, and that A is also
 B.
[
15
]



This dispute becomes even more interesting when one considers that
both Russell and Frege 
agreed
 that names were to be
understood as, in some sense, akin to definite descriptions. Now we
are in a better position to see the deep differences between them in
spite of this superficial agreement. For Frege, that claim in no way
prevented names from being genuine devices of reference. For Russell,
it did. For Frege, a name’s contribution to the truth or falsity
of a sentence was, intensional contexts to the side, its referent. For
Russell, it was the associated description.



Why suppose that definite descriptions do not function to refer? After
all, we certainly seem to use them to talk about particular objects.
When I say “I want the sloop to the right of that one,” I
seem to be expressing a desire to possess a particular sloop, not just
a desire to be relieved from slooplessness in some complex fashion.
What’s more, we can substitute definite descriptions for names
and indexicals in most linguistic contexts while preserving truth.
Naively then, it might seem reasonable to posit that, if names and
indexicals refer, then so too do definite descriptions. Russell,
however, did not lack for motivation in his claim that definite
descriptions do not function to refer. Consider assertive utterances
of the following sentences:




The King of France is bald.


The author of 
Middlemarch
 was the third child of Robert
and Christiana Evans.





(12) is meaningful, but certainly not true. Russell takes it to be
plainly false, though that is controversial (see Strawson (1950) and,
more recently, Von Fintel (2004)). Regardless, if one thinks that
definite descriptions are devices of reference, then it’s
unclear how one will be justified in claiming that sentences like (12)
are meaningful if the description fails to refer. With (13), the
problem facing the referentialist is different: since both these
descriptions should refer to the same individual, Mary Ann Evans (or
‘George Eliot’), it becomes highly unclear why (13)
shouldn’t be knowable 
apriori
. As with identity
statements involving co-referring names, this looks to be merely an
instance of the law of self-identity. And, presumably, any instance of
that law is knowable 
apriori
.



Note that Russell’s theory, in contrast, has no difficulty
explaining any of this. (12) just makes a claim about there being a
unique king of France, a claim which is both perfectly meaningful and
straightforwardly false. (13), on the other hand, makes a claim about
the unique satisfier of one set of properties also uniquely satisfying
another set of properties. That should hardly ever count as knowable

apriori
.



Still, there are also reasons to question Russell’s claim that
definite descriptions don’t function to refer. For instance, as
Strawson (1950) points out, many assertive utterances involving
definite descriptions will seem true even when the relevant
description fails to have a unique satisfier. So, consider:




The table is covered with books.





Assertively uttered in a context where there is a single table stacked
high with books, (14) would seem to be true. Yet Russell predicts the
opposite, so long as there is at least one additional table somewhere
or other in the universe.



Strawson’s alternative was to claim that there are genuinely
referential 
uses
 of definite descriptions. Used in this way,
definite descriptions will, like names and indexicals, contribute an
object or individual to the content asserted by the utterance—so
long as that object satisfies the relevant descriptive material. If it
doesn’t, or if there is no such object, these token uses
won’t refer and, according to Strawson, the utterances of which
they are a part will fail to be either true or false. Still, they will
count as meaningful so long as the description in question is
associated with a coherent rule of use. Meaningfulness, according to
Strawson, hinges on its being clear what a given expression can be
used to do; reference, on the other hand, requires being in the right
kind of situation, a situation where the relevant rule of use is
satisfied. Strawson doesn’t seem to object to there being

attributive
 uses of definite descriptions, which function
more or less as Russell suggested, in addition to referential ones. He
just doesn’t focus on those. Indeed, Strawson seems to
countenance there being a number of different distinct uses of
definite descriptions, including a kind or generic use (e.g.
“The whale is a mammal”) which has only come in for
serious philosophical scrutiny much more recently.



Keith Donnellan (1966) goes even further than Strawson, claiming that
definite descriptions can be used to refer even when the putative
referent fails to satisfy the explicit descriptive material. In what
is probably his most famous example, Donnellan asks us to consider an
utterance of the following:




Who is the man drinking the martini?





Suppose that we are both looking at a man who appears to be drinking a
martini, but who is in fact drinking water, when you utter (15). On
Donnellan’s telling, this is irrelevant; your utterance of the
description ‘the man drinking the martini’ can refer to
this man regardless of whether he is in fact drinking a martini. What
matters, according to Donnellan, is just that you have this man
‘in mind’ when using the relevant description, that you
use the description with this man as your intended target.



One might worry, as does Alfred MacKay (1968), that this leaves
Donnellan open to the charge of offering a Humpty Dumpty view of
definite descriptions—a view on which there are no substantive
constraints on what token descriptions can be used to refer to.
Interestingly, Donnellan (1968)’s response is to appeal to the
Gricean theory of meaning, thus raising the possibility what he means
by ‘having in mind’ is something akin to the
Gricean’s notion of having a referential intention. As we saw
above, however, there is reason to think that even this sort of move
won’t suffice to head off the collapse of intentionalism into
Humpty Dumpty-ism in a fully general sense. So there may still be
reason to think that Donnellan’s willingness to jettison the
explicit descriptive material as a constraint on referential success
is perhaps a bridge too far.



But what of the intuitions behind Donnellan’s example? For, even
if we reject his claim that a description like ‘the

F
’ can be used to refer to something that isn’t
an 
F
, it still seems as though communication is possible in a
case like (15). That is, I should be able to tell who you’re
asking about regardless of whether this man is in fact drinking water
rather than a martini. Kripke (1977) suggests that the way to deal
with cases like this one is to view the sort of reference involved as
merely pragmatic, as having to do with communicative efficacy rather
than with the sort of strict aboutness relevant to determining truth
or falsity in a context. According to Kripke, there is no need to
posit that definite descriptions ever refer. Instead, we can explain
away their apparent referential properties by noting that, even if
they do not refer, speakers will typically still have targets in mind
for them to latch onto. So long as we are reasonably good at
recovering those targets, we will then be in a position to direct each
other’s thought to particular objects and individuals by means
of utterances of definite descriptions without needing to posit that
token instances of these expressions themselves ever function to lock
onto those objects or individuals. In other words, we are free to
accept the Russellian theory of descriptions, supplemented with this
claim that descriptions are very often used to direct listeners’
attention to the ‘speaker’s referent’, as Kripke
calls what he takes to be the referential analogue of Gricean
‘speaker’s meaning’ (or, roughly, whatever the
speaker is trying to get across to the listener, literally or
otherwise).



Kripke seems to have in mind that genuine linguistic
reference—or what he calls ‘semantic
reference’—needs to run purely via convention. His
paradigm example is names, which he takes to be associated with a
convention to the effect that their reference is fixed via an appeal
to causal chains. Alternatively, he might have pointed to
Kaplan’s character-based approach to the pure indexicals, a view
which is equally reliant on conventions to establish reference. As we
saw above, however, there are plausibly limits to this sort of
approach: a conventionalist approach to the reference of impure
indexicals, like demonstratives and pronouns, has proven challenging
to offer. Likewise, once we take seriously the problem of names with
multiple bearers, it becomes far less clear that the reference of
token uses of names can be fixed by anything so simple as pure
linguistic convention. Rather, in both cases, it looks like it is
going to be rather tempting to appeal to facts about the speaker in
order to fix linguistic reference. But if such an appeal is acceptable
in that instance, the case for ruling out definite descriptions as
non-referring starts to look weaker.



If, unlike Kripke, we start with the idea that linguistic reference
is, at root, the result of something that 
we
 do rather than
just something that 
words themselves
 do, then definite
descriptions start to look more like the normal case and the true
indexicals like the outlier. This is, in fact, an old idea, one that
dates back at least to Susan Stebbing (1943) and the later work of
Ludwig Wittgenstein (1958), and which we already saw running through
the ideas of Grice, Strawson, and
 Donnellan.
[
16
]

 The enduring worry, of course, is that without some restrictions on
how we can use terms to successfully refer, we will end up divorcing
the theory of reference from both our intuitions on cases and from any
role in an overall theory of communication. But if we embrace there
being limits on referential success—imposed, perhaps, by Gricean
reflexivity, conventionalized constraints, or both—these worries
can plausibly be avoided. Indeed, with respect to definite
descriptions the case for there being a conventionalized constraint on
referential success, as Strawson took there to be, can look
particularly appealing.



More recently, a rather different sort of challenge has emerged for
those claiming that token definite descriptions sometimes refer:
namely, the difference in meaning which is standardly assumed to mark
definite descriptions off from their indefinite counterparts (that is,
descriptions like ‘a philosopher’ as opposed to ‘the
philosopher’) has itself been called into question. Two main
reasons have been offered for rejecting a difference in meaning
between these sorts of phrases. First, pinning down exactly what this
distinction is supposed to amount to has proven remarkably difficult;
every aspect of Russell’s original analysis (existence,
uniqueness, and satisfaction of the relevant descriptive material),
for instance, has subsequently been called into question. Second, as
Peter Ludlow and Gabriel Segal (2004) point out, a great many
languages turn out to lack anything like the definite/indefinite
distinction. This raises the possibility of this distinction being far
less significant, and less well-defined, than it is usually taken to
 be.
[
17
]



How would rejecting the definite/indefinite distinction affect debates
on whether token uses of definite descriptions can refer? Well, if it
were clear that indefinite descriptions could not be used to refer,
and if these were indeed semantically equivalent to definite
descriptions, then we would have an additional reason to reject the
idea that definite descriptions can be used to refer. On the other
hand, while it is certainly a minority position, Charles Chastain
(1975) and Janet Dean Fodor and Ivan Sag (1982), among others, have
argued that indefinite descriptions too 
can
 be used to refer.
Even if we were to reject this view, advocates of the unitary theory
still typically grant that there is some communicative or pragmatic
difference between the use of ‘the’ as opposed to
‘a’. So it would be open to the stalwart defender of the
view that token definite descriptions can refer to try and argue that
such pragmatic markers can play a significant role in regulating the
use of descriptions to refer—despite these markers being nowhere
reflected in meaning at the level of what is said or asserted.
Obviously, none of this will be settled here.


5. Four Models of Linguistic Reference



Our original goal was to lay out some different models of the nature
and function of linguistic reference. By looking at how philosophers
have attempted to account for the referential features of various
different sorts of linguistic terms, we have effectively introduced
four distinct ways of understanding how referential terms come to
refer to particular objects and individuals. In other words, we have
introduced four distinct models for the what is often called the
‘metasemantics’ of referential terms:



1. On the 
descriptivist
 model, words refer in virtue of being
associated with a specific descriptive contents that serve to identify
particular objects or individuals as their referents. This descriptive
content might be associated with a given term on a particular occasion
in a number of different ways: in virtue of its being something the
speaker associates with the term, in virtue of its being what the
community associates with the term, that the relevant experts in the
community associate with the term, etc.



2. On the 
causal
 model, words refer in virtue of being
associated with chains of use leading back to an initiating use or
‘baptism’ of the referent. Extending this model beyond
names has proven difficult, but one option is to insist that it is
really the perceptual connection that underlies most baptismal events
that runs the show. In that case, perceptually-grounded uses of
demonstratives, deictic pronouns, and definite descriptions can be
folded into the picture relatively easily, with anaphoric uses treated
as something akin to links in a chain of
 reference-borrowing.
[
18
]



3. On the 
character
 model, words refer in virtue of being
associated with regular rules of reference. Paradigm rules of this
sort involve only repeatable, publicly-identifiable elements of the
context and serve to connect particular terms to particular elements
of the context.



4. On the 
intentionalist
 model, words refer in virtue of
being used, intentionally, to refer to particular objects. In other
words, words refer in virtue of their being uttered as part of complex
intentional acts which somehow target particular objects or
individuals.



As should be clear by now, these four models aren’t strictly
exclusive of each other. One might, for instance, conceive of the
classical descriptivism—which appeals to the speaker’s
mental state in order to associate a particular description with a
particular token referential term—as a particular kind of
intentionalism. Presumably, speakers will only manifest the right sort
of mental state when they are intentionally using a referential term
to refer. Likewise, one might view the causal theory as a special case
of the character theory: in the case of terms like names, the
invariant rule of use associated with a particular name is itself to
be explained in terms of a chain of uses leading back to a specific
object or individual. In fact, if one is willing to allow the
characters of certain sorts of terms, like the demonstratives, to
allude to the speaker’s referential intentions, then character
theorists can countenance a certain sort of intentionalism within the
scope of their theory as well. In doing so, however, it is unclear
what remains of the original character model, with its reliance on
publicly-identifiable aspects of the context as the primary driver of
the rules of reference.



It’s worth noting some clear divisions among these options.
First, there is a divide between views according to which referential
terms themselves refer, and that we thus use them to refer because
they already do so, and views according to which it is 
us
 who
do the referring, with token linguistic reference following only
derivatively. The causal theory and classical, intention-free versions
of the character model are paradigm instances of the former sort of
view, whereas the intentionalist model is a paradigm instance of the
latter. If we extend the character model to include characters that
appeal to the speaker’s intentions, then the character model
would seem to straddle this divide, with some terms being used in
context because of what they refer to, independently of us, and others
referring because we use them to.



A second important divide has to do with the extent to which reference
is allowed to depend on potentially idiosyncratic and relatively
inaccessible aspects of the speaker’s mental state. As we saw
above, both classical descriptivists and intentionalists allow for a
strong dependence on the speaker’s mental state, and this can
lead to some odd predictions regarding reference. Griceans and
constraint-type theorists like Reimer have offered ways of trying to
minimize these results, but one might also worry that allowing
reference to depend on the speaker’s mental state at all
undercuts our ability to explain how we use referential terms to
coordinate our object-directed thoughts with each other—in other
words, to communicate about specific things in the world. On the
causal model, for instance, we literally give each other ways of
thinking about the same object by passing on a name. That makes
explaining communication rather straightforward, supposing, that is,
that we are consistently able to recognize which name has been uttered
on a given occasion. The problem of names with multiple bearers means
that this might turn out to be non-trivial; but the payoff, should we
be able to make good on this sort of story, looks significant.
Alternatively, on the Kaplanian theory of true indexicals, we can
explain our ability to coordinate our thought on particular places,
times, and individuals in virtue of the fact that the place, time, and
speaker of the utterance are things that are typically public
knowledge, equally available to every member of the conversation. The
question is whether such an analysis can possibly be extended to
include terms like the impure indexicals.



Third, and finally, there is an important divide between models of
reference which are 
expansive
 as opposed to 
narrow
.
Both intentionalism and descriptivism are clearly expansive. They are
theories of linguistic reference 
per se
, purporting to apply
equally well to any sort of referential term whatsoever. The causal
model, as it is traditionally understood, is a narrow model of
reference; it only purports to apply to the reference of names. The
extended version of the view is more expansive, but even that view has
never been applied to the pure indexicals. Once more, the character
model proves difficult to place; just how broad or narrow it proves
will depend on just how far we are willing to stray in our theorizing
from the paradigm case of the true indexicals.



Expansive theories hold out the promise of a substantive account of
the reference relation. That is, expansive theorists can claim that
the reason that token uses of referential terms play a certain sort of
role in explaining the the truth or falsity of an utterance is that a
certain sort of relation obtains between that token use and some
object in the world. Narrow theorists, in contrast, will have to allow
that there are different sorts of relations that serve to fix
reference for different sorts of referential terms, and even perhaps
different uses of the same term. Thus, they will have to say that what
unifies referential terms is not that, when they succeed in referring,
a particular sort of relation obtains between that token use and some
object or individual, but rather that they play some specific
functional role in determining the truth conditions of an utterance,
its assertive content, or what have you. In other words, standing
behind debates over which of these models we should adopt is a much
larger, and as yet unresolved, question: just what are our explanatory
ambitions in offering a theory of reference in the first place? Are we
trying to understand some unified natural kind, which might then, in
turn, be used to explain a range of further linguistic phenomena? Or
is it rather that there is a range of further linguistic phenomena
that we have some grip on, and positing something like reference is
merely a convenient, or perhaps even necessary, way of explaining
these things? Whichever way we go here is clearly going to have some
significant downstream effects on the related question of what, if
anything, relates linguistic reference to its apparent analogues in
art, cartography, mentation, and so on.


6. Nihilism, Particularism, and Pluralism



So far, this article has mostly taken it for granted that there is a
phenomenon of linguistic reference which is worth investigating. But
there are some who have doubted that there is any such relation
between words and world and others who have doubted that there is just

one
 such relation worthy of investigation.



Concerns of this sort are hardly new. W.V.O. Quine (1960), for
instance, famously claims that reference is ‘inscrutable’,
or that there is simply no matter of fact what a given referential
term refers to. His arguments, however, depend on certain
methodological constraints that many would now be inclined to reject.
Not so with the related ‘problem of the many’, popularized
at roughly the same time by Peter Unger (1980) and Geach (1980). To
see the issue, consider someone using an utterance of
‘that’ to refer to a cloud in the sky. What exactly is
this cloud? The obvious answer would seem to be: a set of water
droplets suspended in the air in such-and-such region. But what about
some droplet right on the edge of that region? Should it be counted or
not? In fact, there will be innumerable such droplets, and we seem to
have no systematic way of answering this question: if we say
‘yes’, we face a continuous march outwards; if we say
‘no’, we face a continuous retreat. Neither option seems
even remotely satisfactory, and yet if we cannot provide an answer to
the question of what exactly the cloud is then it might well seem that
we have equally well failed to answer the question of what the
relevant use of ‘that’ refers
 to.
[
19
]



More recently, pressure on the traditional assumption that referential
terms typically refer to particular objects has come from other
directions. For instance, Richard Kimberly Heck (2014) has suggested
that, once we distinguish what the speaker takes a given term to refer
to from what the listener does, there is no further work left for some
other, ‘objective’ notion of reference to do. And Mario
Gómez-Torrente (2019) has argued that the best response to the
sorts of enduring disagreements we see with respect to many complex
cases of reference, like Kaplan’s Carnap/Agnew case, is to
accept that reference is simply indeterminate in such cases.



Responses to such challenges have been varied. Heck can be read either
as a nihilist about linguistic reference, suggesting that there is
nothing worthy of the name, or as a limited sort of pluralist,
suggesting that there are two reasonable claimants to that title and
that neither of them takes priority over the other.
Gómez-Torrente, in contrast, suggests that reference is
conventional but that the conventions governing many of our
referential terms are incomplete. We can, he suggests, sketch a set of
sufficient conditions for referential success and failure. But these
won’t cover every case, and nor do they offer any guarantee that
their outputs will not be in conflict with each other. None of these
suggestions does much to address the problem raised by Unger and
Geach, though I think it is safe to assume that both Heck and
Gómez-Torrente might want to say that this is a problem
primarily for either metaphysicians or philosophers of perception, and
that philosophers of language should feel free to adopt whatever
solutions eventually emanate from those
 quarters.
[
20
]



A more radical option is mooted in Christopher Gauker (2008), who
suggests that there is simply no possibility of offering a systematic
theory of demonstrative reference. Rather, on Gauker’s view, the
best one can do is point to the sorts of factors that might fit into
all things considered judgments about reference. While Gauker stops
short of this, a natural extension of his view would apply it to the
full panoply of referential terms. In that case, there would turn out
to be facts of the matter about reference even in cases where we tend
to disagree—though a full explanation of those facts will
forever prove evasive. One might even go so far as to suggest that
this sort of particularistic approach to linguistic reference can
serve to resolve the problem of the many as it applies to linguistic
reference: on any occasion of successful reference to an object, there
will be an answer to the question of what the material constitution of
that object is. It’s just that we will hardly ever, if ever, be
in a position to know the answer. Whether we should consider this a
satisfying response to that problem is, of course, another matter
entirely.



Finally, Nowak and Michaelson (2022) have suggested that some of these
issues can be overcome by embracing a pluralistic approach to
reference. Like Heck, they take it that sometimes we will be
interested in the speaker’s construal or the listener’s
construal of the relevant term. But unlike Heck, they argue that there
is a robust sense in which both the speaker and listener can be wrong
about what a given utterance of a referential term referred to. For
instance, consider a version of Kaplan’s Carnap/Agnew case where
the speaker is unaware of the switch and the listener, only half
paying attention, takes the speaker to be talking about a picture of
Boris Johnson that they saw in the paper earlier. Heck’s
appraisal of this case will be that the speaker and listener’s
construals are enough for us to say that communication has not
succeeded. But Nowak and Michaelson contend that there are other
things we might be interested in, like: how would we settle a bet if I
had wagered that the speaker would say something true and you had
wagered that they would say something false? If we do indeed have
consistent judgments on these sorts of questions, and if those
judgments depend on a sort of reference that isn’t reducible to
either the speaker or the listener’s construals, then it looks
like a more extensive sort of pluralism about reference might be
warranted—one that takes reference to be relative to be both a
context and a question we are interested in investigating, rather than
just relative to a context. Of course, even a more thoroughgoing
pluralism of this sort won’t do anything to address the
challenge raised by Unger and Geach.



At this point, it is natural to wonder whether the same sorts of
considerations which have motivated the exploration of nihilism,
particularism, and pluralism about linguistic reference will carry
over to other kinds of reference as well. It is fairly easy to imagine
how the issues raised by Unger and Geach might well arise with respect
to pictorial or perceptual reference, but harder to see how
Heck’s challenge is going to apply in the case of the latter. It
might thus turn out that there are reasons to be a pluralist about,
say, linguistic reference but not about perceptual reference. Getting
clearer on this, however, is likely to require making headway on the
question of what (if anything) unifies e.g. linguistic, perceptual,
and pictorial reference, what (if anything) makes them species of a
single genus. So far at least, that question remains largely
unexplored.






Bibliography




Abbott, B., 2008. ‘Issues in the Semantics and Pragmatics of
Definite Descriptions in English,’ in J. Gundel & N. Hedberg
(eds.), 
Reference: Interdisciplinary Perspectives
, Oxford:
Oxford University Press.


Bach, K., 1992. ‘Intentions and Demonstrations,’

Analysis
, 52(3): 140–146.


–––, 2017. ‘Reference, Intention, and
Context: Do Demonstratives Really Refer?,’ in M. de Ponte and K.
Korta (eds.), 
Reference and Representation in Thought and
Language
, Oxford: Oxford University Press.


Burge, T., 1973. ‘Reference and Proper Names,’

Journal of Philosophy
, 70(14): 425–439.


Chastain, C., 1975. ‘Reference and Context,’, in K.
Gunderson (ed.), 
Language, Mind and Knowledge
 (Minnesota
Studies in the Philosophy of Science: Volume VII), Minnesota:
University of Minnesota Press.


Cohen, J. and E. Michaelson, 2013. ‘Indexicality and the
Answering Machine Paradox,’ 
Philosophy Compass
, 8(6):
580–592.


Devitt, M., 1997. ‘Meaning and Psychology: A Response to
Richard,’ 
Noûs
, 31(1): 115–131.


–––, 2022. ‘The Irrelevance of Intentions
to Refer: Demonstratives and Demonstrations,’ 
Philosophical
Studies
, 179(3): 995–1004.


Dickie, I., 2015. 
Fixing Reference
, Oxford: Oxford
University Press.


Donnellan , K., 1966. ‘Reference and Definite
Descriptions,’ 
Philosophical Review
, 75(3):
281–304.


–––, 1968. ‘Putting Humpty Dumpty Together
Again,’ 
Philosophical Review
, 77(2):
203–215.


–––, 1970. ‘Proper Names and Identifying
Descriptions,’ 
Synthese
, 21(3–4):
335–358.


Evans, G., 1973. ‘The Causal Theory of Names,’

Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society
, Supplementary Volume
47: 187–208.


–––, 1982. 
The Varieties of Reference
,
Oxford: Oxford University Press.


Fara, D. Graff, 2015. ‘Names are Predicates,’

Philosophical Review
, 124(1): 59–127.


von Fintel, K., 2004. ‘Would you Believe It? The King of
France is Back! (Presuppositions and Truth-Value Intuitions),’
in A. Bezuidenhout and M. Reimer (eds.), 
Descriptions and Beyond:
An Interdisciplinary Collection of Essays on Definite and Indefinite
Descriptions
, Oxford: Oxford University Press.


Fodor, J.D., and I. Sag, 1982. ‘Referential and
Quantificational Indefinites,’ 
Linguistics and
Philosophy
, 5(3): 355–398.


Frege, G., 1892. ‘On Sense and Reference,’ in P. Geach
and M. Black (eds.) 
Translations from the Philosophical Writings
of Gottlob Frege
, Oxford: Blackwell (1952).


García-Carpintero, M., 1998. ‘Indexicals as
Token-Reflexives,’ 
Mind
, 107(427): 529–564.


Gauker, C., 2008, ‘Zero Tolerance for Pragmatics,’

Synthese
, 165(3): 359–371.


Geach, P., 1969. ‘The Perils of Pauline,’ 
Review
of Metaphysics
, 23(2): 287–300.


–––, 1980. 
Reference and Generality
,
Ithaca: Cornell University Press.


Gray, A., 2014. ‘Name-Bearing, Reference, and
Circularity,’ 
Philosophical Studies
, 171(2):
207–231.


–––, 2015. ‘Lexical Individuation and
Predicativism About Names,’ 
Thought
, 4(2):
113–123.


Gómez-Torrente, M., 2019. 
Roads to Reference
,
Oxford: Oxford University Press.


Grice, P., 1957. ‘Meaning,’ 
Philosophical
Review
, 66(3): 377–388.


Heck, R.K., 2014, ‘Semantics and Context-Dependence: Towards
a Strawsonian Account,’in A. Burgess and B. Sherman (eds.),

Metasemantics: New Essays on the Foundations of Meaning
,
Oxford: Oxford University Press (originally published under the name
‘R.G. Heck Jr.’).


Jeshion, R., 2015. ‘Names Not Predicates,’ in A.
Bianchi (ed.), 
On Reference
, Oxford: Oxford University
Press.


Kaplan, D., 1978. ‘Dthat,’ in P. French, T. Uehling,
and H. Wettstein (eds.), 
Contemporary Perspectives in the
Philosophy of Language
, Minneapolis: University of Minnesota
Press.


–––, 1989a. ‘Afterthoughts,’ in J.
Almog, J. Perry, and H. Wettstein (eds.), 
Themes from Kaplan
,
Oxford: Oxford University Press.


–––, 1989b. ‘Demonstratives: An Essay on
the Semantics, Logic, Metaphysics, and Epistemology of Demonstratives
and Other Indexicals,’ in J. Almog, J. Perry, and H. Wettstein
(eds.), 
Themes from Kaplan
, Oxford: Oxford University
Press.


–––, 1990. ‘Words,’ 
Proceedings
of the Aristotelian Society
, 64: 93–119.


Keiser, J., 2023. 
Non-Ideal Foundations of Language
, New
York: Routledge.


King, J., 2013. ‘Supplementives, the Coordination Account,
and Conflicting Intentions,’ 
Philosophical
Perspectives
, 27(1): 288–311.


–––, 2014. ‘Speaker Intentions in
Context,’ 
Noûs
, 48(2): 219–237.


Kripke, S., 1972. 
Naming and Necessity
, Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.


–––, 1977. ‘Speaker’s Reference and
Semantic Reference,’ 
Midwest Studies in Philosophy
, 2:
255–76.


Lewis, D., 1993. ‘Many, but Almost One,’ in J. Bacon
(ed.), 
Ontology, Causality and Mind: Essays in Honour of D M
Armstrong
, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.


Ludlow, P. and G. Segal, 2004. ‘On a Unitary Semantical
Analysis for Definite and Indefinite Descriptions,’ in A.
Bezuidenhout and M. Reimer (eds.), 
Descriptions and Beyond: An
Interdisciplinary Collection of Essays on Definite and Indefinite
Descriptions
, Oxford: Oxford University Press.


MacKay, A., 1968. ‘Mr. Donnellan and Humpty Dumpty on
Referring,’ 
Philosophical Review
, 77(2):
197–202.


Marcus, R. Barcan, 1947. “The Identity of Individuals in a
Strict Functional Calculus of Second Order,” 
Journal of
Symbolic Logic
, 12(1): 12–15.


–––, 1961. ‘Modalities and Intensional
Languages,’ 
Synthese
, 13(4): 303–322.


–––, 1993. 
Modalities
, Oxford: Oxford
University Press.


McGinn, C., 1981. ‘The Mechanism of Reference,’

Synthese
, 49(2): 157–186.


Meinong, A., 1904. ‘The Theory of Objects,’ in Meinong
(ed.) 
Untersuchungen zur Gegenstandstheorie und Psychologie
,
Barth: Leipzig.


Mill, J. S., 1867. 
A System of Logic
, London:
Longmans.


Michaelson, E., 2022. ‘Speaker’s Reference, Semantic
Reference, Sneaky Reference,’ 
Mind and Language
, 37(5):
856–875.


–––, 2023. ‘The Vagaries of
Reference,’ 
Ergo
, 9(52): 1433–1448.


–––, forthcoming. ‘Unspeakable
Names,’
Synthese
, first online 13 February 2023.
doi:10.1007/s11229-023-04038-0


Michaelson, E. and E. Nowak, 2022. ‘On Salience-Based
Theories of Demonstratives,’ in S. Archer (ed.) 
Salience: A
Philosophical Inquiry
, New York: Routledge.


Mount, A., 2008. ‘Intentions, Gestures, and Salience in
Ordinary and Deferred Demonstrative Reference,’ 
Mind and
Language
, 23(2): 145–164.


Neale, S., 2004. ‘This, That, and The Other,’ in A.
Bezuidenhout and M. Reimer (eds.), 
Descriptions and Beyond: An
Interdisciplinary Collection of Essays on Definite and Indefinite
Descriptions
, Oxford: Oxford University Press.


Nelson, M., 2002. ‘Descriptivism Defended,’

Noûs
, 36(3): 408-435.


Nowak, E., 2020, ‘No Context, No Content, No Problem,’

Mind and Language
, 36(2): 189–220.


Nowak, E. and E. Michaelson, 2020. ‘Discourse and
Method,’ 
Linguistics and Philosophy
, 43(2):
119–138.


–––, 2021. ‘Who’s Your Ideal
Listener?’ 
Australasian Journal of Philosophy
, 99(2):
257–270.


–––, 2022. ‘Meta-Metasemantics, or the
Quest for the One True Metasemantics,’ 
Philosophical
Quarterly
, 72(1): 135–154.


Perry, J., 2001. 
Reference and Reflexivity
, Stanford:
CSLI Publications.


Pelczar, M. and Rainsbury, J., 1998. ‘The Indexical
Character of Names,’ 
Synthese
, 114(2):
293–317.


Predelli, S., 2002. ‘Intentions, Indexicals, and
Communication,’ 
Analysis
, 62(4): 310–316.


Quine, W.V.O., 1960. 
Word and Object
, Cambridge MA: MIT
Press.


Radulescu, A., 2018. ‘The Difference Between Indexicals and
Demonstratives,’ 
Synthese
, 195(7):
3173–3196.


–––, 2019. ‘A Defense of Intentionalism
about Demonstratives,’ 
Australasian Journal of
Philosophy
, 97(4): 775–791.


Rami, D., 2014. ‘The Use-Conditional Conception of Proper
Names,’ 
Philosophical Studies
, 168(1):
119–150.


Recanati, F., 1997. 
Direct Reference: From Language to
Thought
, Oxford: Blackwell.


Reichenbach, H., 1947. 
Elements of Symbolic Logic
, New
York: Dover.


Reimer, M., 1991. ‘Demonstratives, Demonstrations, and
Demonstrata,’ 
Philosophical Studies
, 63(2):
187–202.


–––, 1992. ‘Three Views of Demonstrative
Reference,’ 
Synthese
, 93(3): 373–402.


Russell, B., 1905. ‘On Denoting,’ 
Mind
,
14(56): 479–93.


–––, 1911. ‘Knowledge by Acquaintance and
Knowledge by Description,’ 
Proceedings of the Aristotelian
Society
, 11: 108–128.


Schiffer, S., 1981. ‘Indexicals and the Theory of
Reference,’ 
Synthese
, 49: 43–100.


Schoubye, A., 2011. 
On Describing
, Ph.D. Thesis,
Department of Philosophy, St. Andrews University.


Searle, J., 1983. 
Intentionality
, Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.


Soames, S., 2002. 
Beyond Rigidity
, Oxford: Oxford
University Press.


Speaks, J., 2016. ‘The Role of Speaker and Hearer in the
Character of Demonstratives,’ 
Mind
, 125(498):
301–229.


–––, 2017. ‘A Puzzle About Demonstratives
and Semantic Competence,’ 
Philosophical Studies
,
174(3): 709–734.


Stebbing, S., 1943. 
A Modern Elementary Logic
, London:
Methuen.


Stine, G., 1978. ‘Meaning Other Than What We Say and
Referring,’ 
Philosophical Studies
, 33(4):
319–337.


Stójnic, U., Stone, M., and E. Lepore, 2013. ‘Deixis
(Even Without Pointing),’ 
Philosophical Perspectives
,
27(1): 502–525.


–––, 2017. ‘Discourse and Logical Form:
Pronouns, Attention, and Coherence,’ 
Linguistics and
Philosophy
, 40(5): 519–547.


Stokke, A., 2010. ‘Intention-Sensitive Semantics,’

Synthese
, 175(3): 383–404.


Strawson, P., 1950. ‘On Referring,’ 
Mind
,
59(235): 320–44.


–––, 1959. 
Individuals: An Essay in
Descriptive Metaphysics
, London: Methuen.


Unger, P., 1980. ‘The Problem of the Many,’

Midwest Studies in Philosophy
, 5(1): 411–468.


Unnsteinsson, E., 2022. 
Talking About: An Intensionalist
Theory of Reference
, Oxford: Oxford University Press.


Wittgenstein, L., 1958. 
The Blue and the Brown Books
,
Oxford: Basil Blackwell.


Wettstein, H., 1984. ‘How to Bridge the Gap between Meaning
and Reference,’ 
Synthese
, 58(1): 63–84.








Academic Tools










How to cite this entry
.








Preview the PDF version of this entry
 at the
 
Friends of the SEP Society
.








Look up topics and thinkers related to this entry

 at the Internet Philosophy Ontology Project (InPhO).








Enhanced bibliography for this entry

at 
PhilPapers
, with links to its database.












Other Internet Resources



[Please contact the author with suggestions.]






Related Entries




descriptions
 |
 
externalism about the mind
 |
 
Goodman, Nelson: aesthetics
 |
 
indexicals
 |
 
many, problem of
 |
 
mental content: causal theories of
 |
 
mental content: teleological theories of
 |
 
mental representation
 |
 
names
 |
 
natural kinds
 |
 
nonexistent objects
 |
 
rigid designators
 |
 
skepticism: and content externalism








Acknowledgments



Editor’s note: In 2014, Eliot Michaelson took over
responsibility for updating the entry originally written by Marga
Reimer. As of the 2024 update, Eliot Michaelson is listed as sole
author because no substantive content remains from Reimer’s
version.









 






Copyright © 2024
 by




Eliot Michaelson

<
eliot
.
michaelson
@
kcl
.
ac
.
uk
>
    




 









  Open access to the SEP is made possible by a world-wide funding initiative.

  Please Read How You Can Help Support the Growth and Development of the Encyclopedia




 

