











 
 Entry Navigation 






Entry Contents


Bibliography


Academic Tools


Friends PDF Preview 


Author and Citation Info 
 


Back to Top 


























Scientific Reduction
First published Tue Apr 8, 2014; substantive revision Wed Mar 6, 2024





The English verb ‘reduce’ derives from the Latin
‘
reducere
’, whose literal meaning ‘to bring
back’, informs its metaphorical use in philosophy. If one
asserts that the mental reduces to the physical, that heat reduces to
kinetic molecular energy, or that one theory reduces to another
theory, one implies that in some relevant sense the reduced theory can
be 
brought back
 to the reducing theory, the mental can be

brought back
 to the physical, or heat can be 
brought
back
 to molecular kinetic energy. The term
‘reduction’ as used in philosophy expresses the idea that
if an entity 
x
 reduces to an entity 
y
 then 
y
 is in a sense

prior to
 
x
, or is 
more basic than
 
x
, or is

more fundamental than
 
x
. This is a necessary, not a
sufficient condition for reduction. One may accept that some
physiological state is more fundamental than, or prior to some mental
state, like a pain experience, but deny that this mental state is
reducible.



J.J.C. Smart provided an influential, tentative description of the
reduction relation according to which an entity 
x
 reduces to an
entity 
y
 only if 
x
 does not exist ‘over and above’

y
 (Smart 1959: 143). Smart frames the question as one of
existence, an 
ontological question
: What really exists? How
many basic kinds of things exist? Approaching the issue from a
different slant, the philosophical notion of ‘reduction’
can be cashed out in terms of an 
explanatory relation
. If

x
 reduces to 
y
, then it can in a relevantly strong sense be
explained in terms of 
y
. Take an example from Ernest Nagel.
Describing the reduction of headaches, he writes that when





the detailed physical, chemical, and physiological conditions for the
occurrence of headaches are ascertained … an explanation will
have been found for the occurrence of headaches (Nagel 1961: 366)





Alternatively, reductions can be conceived of as consisting in a
specific form of 
assimilation
—a description that can
also be found in Nagel (1961):





[In a reduction, a] set of distinctive traits of some subject matter
is assimilated to what is patently a set of quite dissimilar traits.
(Nagel 1961: 339f.)





Reductivists are generally realists about the reduced phenomena and
their views are in that respect 
conservative
. They are
committed to the reality of the reducing base and thus to the reality
of whatever reduces to that base. If thoughts reduce to brain states
and if these brain states are real, then so too are thoughts. Though
conservative realism is the norm, some reductionists take a more
anti-realist view. In such cases the reducing phenomena are taken to
replace the prior phenomena which are in turn 
eliminated
. The
idea of mental illness as a type of psycho-neural disorder replaced
the idea of demon possession. Demons and their voices have no role or
reality in the new theory. The oxygen theory of combustion replaced
the phlogiston theory and phlogiston was eliminated.



Whether to count such 
eliminativist
 views as a variety of
reduction is a matter of terminological choice. Replacement has
sometimes been classed as a form of reduction (Kemeny & Oppenheim
1956), and it corresponds to an everyday sense in which theories are
described as ‘reductive’. There is clearly a reductive
aspect to the eliminativist’s claim that nothing is real other
than the replacing phenomena, e.g., that when it comes to mental
phenomena, there is nothing real other than brain states. Nonetheless
most reductive views are realist, so ‘reduction’ hereafter
should be understood in the conservative sense that entails the
realism of the reduced phenomena unless otherwise noted.



Though the term ‘reduction’ in this use may not correspond
to everyday use nor to its use in scientific discourse, its technical
meaning is not fixed by mere stipulation. ‘Reduction’ is a
term of ordinary language, and, building upon its common metaphoric
meaning philosophers use it to designate relations of particular
philosophical importance in a number of closely related fields,
especially in the philosophy of science, the philosophy of mind, and
metaphysics. To make this idea more precise, it has been suggested,
from a metaphysical perspective, that reduction is linked to
constitution, identity, supervenience, or ground. From a philosophy of
science perspective, ontic reduction talk has sometimes been regarded
with suspicion. Here, reduction is often reconstructed as an
inter-theory relation.



Different accounts of scientific reduction have shaped debates about
diverse topics including scientific unification, the relation between

(folk-)psychology
 and neuroscience, the
metaphysics of the mind, the status of biology 
vis à
vis
 chemistry, and the relation between allegedly teleological
explanations and causal explanations. Understanding the relevant
notions is thus a prerequisite for understanding key issues in
contemporary analytic philosophy. Moreover, the notion of reduction
itself has become a target of recent philosophical discussion,
especially in the philosophy of science and in metaphysics.








1. Historical background


2. Models of scientific reduction in the philosophy of science




2.1 Reduction and theory-succession


2.2 Nagelian models of reduction


2.3 Problems for Nagelian models of reduction


2.4 Structuralist models of reduction


2.5 Problems for structuralist models of reduction


2.6 “New Wave”-models of reduction


2.7 Problems for “New Wave”-models of reduction


2.8 Reduction and mechanisms




3. Models of scientific reduction in the philosophy of mind




3.1 Type-identity theories


3.2 Token-identity theories


3.3 Local reductions and disjunctive kinds


3.4 Functional reduction




4. Definitions of ‘_reduces to_’




4.1 Representational and ontological reduction


4.2 Theories


4.3 Models


4.4 Concepts


4.5 Properties


4.6 Wholes and their parts


4.7 Mechanisms




5. Unresolved issues




5.1 A priori reductions


5.2 Reduction and explanation


5.3 Reduction, Ground, and Fundamentality




6. Perspectives on reduction


Bibliography


Academic Tools


Other Internet Resources


Related Entries










1. Historical background



Conflicts between reductionist views and their monist, dualist and
pluralist metaphysical rivals have loomed large in the history of
philosophy. The classical debate between materialism and mind-body
dualism is the most familiar of many such disputes. The Cartesian
dualist is committed to distinct types of substances (minds and
bodies) each with its own essence. Different versions of
dualism—interactive, epiphenomenal, parallelist – disagree
about whether the two causally interact, but they all assert the
ontological difference between the mind and the body. Neither reduces
to the other. They are distinct, and both are real. In contrast to
dualism, reductionism, thus construed, is a form of monism. Reductive
physicalists are monists in that they accept only physical entities,
properties or states. But not all monists are reductionists. Unlike
reductionism, neutral monism does not privilege mind or matter.



Most contemporary reductionists and eliminativists are committed to

materialism
 or 
physicalism
—the view that the
physical or material provides the fundamental reductive base. However
reductionism 
per se
 is ontologically neutral, it does not
entail any specific ontological positions. Indeed reductionism could
be true in a nonphysical world as long as this world had some base and
everything in that world reduced to that base. Some historical
reductivists have been resolutely opposed to materialism and
physicalism. According to Bishop Berkeley’s phenomenal idealism
things like ordinary tables and chairs reduce to collections of ideas;
he denied the existence of matter. On Berkeley’s reductive view
everything real reduces to minds and ideas. Idealism, as proposed by
Fichte (cf. Lachs 1972) can also be given a reductive interpretation.
On this view, the non-mental does not exist over and above the mental.
The non-mental can be fully explained in terms of the mental (in the
case of Fichte: the self), and it can be ultimately assimilated to the
mental. According to this interpretation, everything 
is

ultimately mental. Idealists are reductionists whose reductive base is
mental.



Idealism does not have many contemporary supporters, but there are
current reductive theories that are logically independent of
physicalism though consistent with it. Nominalism, for example, can be
regarded as a reductive theory about kinds. The nominalist argues that
the supposed reality of abstract objects—whether properties and
kinds or numbers and sets—can be reduced to facts about concrete
objects and our ways of talking about them. French structuralists can
be seen as reductionists about subjects, or subjectivism; they suggest
that the functioning of individual intentions and goals reduces to the
inner workings of larger discourses. And perhaps, some forms of
panpsychism, which take complex objects (or concepts of such objects)
to reduce to fundamental objects (or concepts of such objects), are
similar to idealism in that they postulate mental properties, objects
or concepts to be fundamental (cf. Chalmers 2020 for a discussion of
the relation between panpsychism and idealism). 



In sum, though most contemporary reductionists are also physicalists,
there are many actual reductionist positions that are independent of
materialism and physicalism. Such positions have played an important
role in the history of philosophy, and some are actively supported
today even as forms of 
scientific
 reduction.



Modern debates about reduction have several sources. They go back to
the early years of logical empiricism. Neurath (1931) and Carnap
(1934) described reduction as a relation of translation, or at least
of unification of all knowledge within one common language. This
unificationist program was endorsed due to general semantic, epistemic
and logical considerations. Philosophers of science have proposed
several explications of the notion of reduction, often with an eye on
broader conceptions not only of unification, but also of explanation
and scientific change. Today, it is widely acknowledged that general
scientific unification by reduction is not something we can hope for
in the near future. Perhaps, though straightforward reductions are
rare, reductionism might still play a role as a regulative ideal
(Schaffner 1993); the notion of reduction can, on this view, be used
to characterize one extreme of a spectrum of possible relations
between different stages of scientific developments. It comes with a
specific normative power: If a reduction can be effected, it

should
 be effected.



Materialist explications of and arguments for reduction differ.
Philosophers of mind concerned with specific questions about whether
the mental just 
is
 physiological or even physical in nature
have asked what notions of reduction might be relevant and how they
might apply to particular cases in psychology and neuroscience. They
have tried to defend the view that ultimately, we will be in a
position to explain mental facts in terms of physiological facts.
Smart (1959) argued that we should endorse a form of reductionism
about the mental:





because of Ockham’s razor. It seems to me that science is
increasingly giving us a viewpoint whereby organisms are able to be
seen as physicochemical mechanisms. (Smart 1959, 142)





This view became highly influential in the second half of the 20th
century, due to considerations about artificial intelligence and
progress made in the neurosciences. Materialist critics of
reductionism (non-reductive physicalists) have argued that the
classifications, properties, or kinds of the mind-sciences (and
perhaps other special sciences) cannot successfully be reduced,
although all actual occurrences or tokens of these kinds are identical
to material objects, or events involving material objects and
processes only.



The philosophy of science strand is the topic of
 
section 2
,
 and the philosophy of mind debate is discussed in
 
section 3
.



More recently, philosophers of science have adopted a different
approach entirely, discussing reduction and related topics – in
particular: emergence – from a more science-oriented
perspective. This difference in perspective raises subtle questions
about topic identity, that is: whether the topic of reduction remains
the same across these debates. We will return to a more
science-oriented perspective and its implications in the final
 
section 6
.
 Until then, we will neglect this difference even when presenting
positions that have been inspired by a science-oriented
perspective.


2. Models of scientific reduction in the philosophy of science



The philosophical discussion of reduction-relations in the sciences
was inspired by cases such as the alleged reduction of Newtonian
mechanics to relativity theory, of chemistry to atomic physics, and of
gas laws to statistical mechanics. However, in what respects these
actual episodes of theory change count as reductions is a complex
matter. Many factors might be relevant, not merely logical and
metaphysical relations but also epistemic, psychological, and
pragmatic ones. Questions also arose about the generalizability of
these cases and their role in scientific progress or change, which led
to the idea that an appropriate model of reduction should mainly focus
on cases of actual theory succession. The main target in the reduction
debate within the philosophy of science, however, was not a
reconstruction of the process of scientific change, but rather an
explication of the relation between successive theories that justified
the relevant change, i.e., relations alleged to hold between pairs of
theories such as Newtonian mechanics and relativity theory, or
thermodynamics and statistical mechanics. In this context, the relata
of reductions were conceived of as theories or models, rather than
properties, events, or kinds. Thus, they are often referred to as
‘
theory
 
reductions
’.


2.1 Reduction and theory-succession



The term ‘reduction’ oscillates between two different uses
(at least). Kemeny and Oppenheim (1956) regard the idea that
reductions somehow relate to scientific progress as being crucial for
understanding reduction. According to this use of the term, reduction
is a relation of actual theory-succession, such that reductions happen
at a certain time, namely, when scientists reduce one theory to
another. Trivially, whether or not a theory actually becomes the
successor of another theory will depend not only on logical and
metaphysical features of the respective theories, but also on
pragmatic and epistemic aspects. The most relevant of these aspects
are to be captured in a rational reconstruction, which plays a major
role in some models of reduction.



When discussing the status of bridge-principles (intuitively,
statements that connect the vocabulary of the reducing theory to the
reduced theory), Ernest Nagel suggested that they might play different
roles in the 
discovery
 of reductions than in after the fact
analyses. They may function as hypotheses to be tested, or they may
rely on empirical evidence already gathered. Similarly, Kenneth
Schaffner suggests that an appropriate model of reduction should take
into account not only logical or metaphysical aspects regarding the
reduced and the reducing theory. Rather, it should also be sensitive
to pragmatic and epistemic aspects underlying the actions of
scientists who carry out reductions (Schaffner 1993: 515f.)—an
idea he labels ‘logical pragmatism’. New Wave
reductionists criticized other models, especially Nagel’s, for
not being sensitive to how reductions are actually carried out, a
point also made by Ager, Aronson, and Weingard (1974).



The distinction between reduction as an activity and reduction as a
relation that is independent of what scientists actually do is
tentatively captured by the distinction between 
diachronic

and 
synchronic reduction
.



The main idea of diachronic reduction is not merely that reduction is
a 
temporal
 affair but that reductions consist in the
replacement of one theory by another theory, such that one theory (the
reducing one) becomes the successor of the reduced theory
(Dupré 1993; Rosenberg 2006). It is also often described as a
sort of theory-improvement or scientific progress: particularly one in
which the laws of the prior theory apply to a proper subset of the
cases covered by the laws of the succeeding theory (Dizadji Bahmani et
al. 2010). Here, the focus is on epistemic progress. Hence, this form
of reduction has been described as “epistemological
reduction” (Scerri & McIntyre 1997; Esfeld & Sachse
2010).



The notion of reduction as a scientific activity, or as an event of
scientific change, is discussed in the entries
 
scientific revolutions

 and
 
scientific progress
.
 The remainder of this entry will deal with “synchronic”
aspects of reduction.


2.2 Nagelian models of reduction



Recent reduction debates in the philosophy of science were initiated
by Ernest Nagel’s model of theory reduction (Nagel 1949, 1961,
1970), which has also received considerable attention in the
philosophy of mind (see, e.g., Fodor 1981: 150; Kim 1993: 150, 248).
More recent approaches to reduction depart from or were developed in
opposition to the Nagel model (Hooker 1981; Churchland 1985; Schaffner
1993; Bickle 1998, 2003; Dizadji-Bahmani, Frigg, & Hartmann 2010;
van Riel 2014), though it has been argued that most of these
approaches merely echo the Nagel model instead of proposing
fundamentally new interpretations (Endicott 1998, 2001; Dizadji
Bahmani et al. 2010).


2.2.1 Nagel’s model



Nagel describes his model as follows:





A reduction is effected when the experimental laws of the secondary
science (and if it has an adequate theory, its theory as well) are
shown to be the logical consequences of the theoretical assumptions
(inclusive of the coordinating definitions) of the primary science.
(Nagel 1961: 352)





The basic idea is simple: Reduction is (i) a kind of explanation
relation, which (ii) holds between two theories if and only if (iii)
one of these theories is derivable from the other, (iv) with the help
of bridge laws (or “coordinating definitions”). The basic
model covers two sorts of reduction, one in which bridge laws are not
required (homogeneous cases) and one in which they are (for a
presentation of homogeneous cases of reductions and the question of
whether or not alleged cases of reductions really should count as
reductions in the Nagelian sense, see the entry on
 
intertheory relations in physics
).
 Importantly, Nagel added several “non-formal” conditions
on interesting reductions (1961: chap. 11, Sec. III). For example,
theories and bridge-laws should be well established rather than
arbitrarily chosen, and the reducing theory “must also be
fertile in usable suggestions for developing the secondary science
… and augment or correct its currently accepted body of
laws.” (Nagel 1961: 360) Putnam (1965: 206ff., esp. n. 3), Nagel
(1970: 120–21, 133), Schaffner (1993: chapter 9) and Endicott
(1998) have argued that augmentation and correction can be achieved by
approximation and introduction of boundary conditions for
bridge-laws.


2.2.2 Direct and indirect reduction



The Nagel model of reduction parallels the so called “deductive
nomological model” (DN-model) of explanation according to which
explaining some fact involves showing how its truth can be deduced
from a set of other truths containing at least some laws. For example
according to the DN model, one explains the acceleration of a falling
body by showing how it can be deduced from Newton’s laws and
statements describing initial conditions. The Nagel model of reduction
thus seems to suggest that a reduced theory is 
directly

explained by the corresponding reducing theory.



In this sense, Nagel reduction is sometimes (cf. Schaffner 1967: 137,
1993: 423) interpreted as a kind of 
direct
 reduction, in
contrast with 
indirect reductions
—those that hold in
virtue of the fact that the reducing theory explains the occurrence of
the phenomena of the reduced theory (rather than the reduced theory
itself)—a view associated with Kemeny and Oppenheim (1956) and
Friedman (1982), and captured as one variant of reduction by
Schaffner’s model (Schaffner 1993).



However, some have argued that the distinction itself may not be
viable (van Riel 2011). The examples Nagel discusses suggest that he
believed his model to be 
indirect
—an
“explanation” of a theory in terms of derivation from a
reducing theory amounts to using the reducing theory to explain the
phenomena dealt with by the reduced theory. This should not come as a
surprise: if the laws of the reducing theory explain the laws of the
reduced theory (that is: why what these laws state is the case or
approximately the case), and if the latter explain some set of
phenomena, then by the transitivity of explanation, the former will
explain this set of phenomena, too. But see Sarkar (2015) for a
different view.


2.2.3 Bridge principles



Nagel’s major (and perhaps most controversial) contribution was
the introduction of bridge principles. The notion of bridge
principles, (also: ‘bridge laws’ and ‘coordinating
definitions’) can be spelled out in several different ways. The
most common way in accord with Nagel (1961: chap. 11, Sec. II.3) is to
describe them syntactically as bi-conditionals linking terms in the
vocabularies of the two theories. In the same context, however, Nagel
describes them in terms of the ‘nature of the linkages
postulated’ (Nagel 1961: 354). He distinguishes three such
linkages:




The links mimicked by the bridge laws are ‘logical
connections’ (1961: 354), which are understood as meaning
connections.


The links postulated by bridge laws are conventions or
stipulations (‘deliberate fiat’; 1961: 354).


The links postulated by bridge laws are ‘factual or
material’ (1961: 354); that is, bridge laws state empirical
facts (these truths are then described as empirical hypotheses).





There is a gap between having the form of a bi-conditional and
postulating or mimicking a logical connection etc. Accordingly, the
exact nature of bridge-laws in Nagel’s account is a matter of
dispute. Some tend to suggest weaker notions, such as (nomologically
necessary) co-instantiation or co-relation (Dizadji Bahmani et al.
2010, also discussed in Klein 2009 and Kim 1998: 90, 2008), whereas
others suggest stronger interpretations in terms of nomic conections
or identities (Sklar 1967; Schaffner 1993; Esfeld & Sachse 2007;
van Riel 2011).



In Nagel 1970, he explicitly states that bridge-laws state identities
of the properties signified by the relevant predicates or nomic
relations among extensions. If bridge laws should thus be conceived of
as stating identities or relations among the relevant terms’
extensions, then clearly reduction on such a view incorporates
essential reference to the theories’ ontologies and is more than
just a two-place relation holding among theories:





In … cases [of reduction in which the vocabularies of the two
relata of the reduction relation differ], the distinctive traits that
are the subject matter of the [reduced] science fall into the province
of a theory that may have been initially designed for handling
qualitatively different materials…. The [reducing] science thus
seems to wipe out familiar distinctions as spurious, and appears to
maintain that what are prima facie indisputably different traits of
things are really identical. (Nagel 1961: 340)





Thus, Nagel-reduction is a relation that holds not just between
theories but also between their ontologies. Sometimes, however, the
Nagel model has been characterized as an 
epistemological

model of reduction, because it is a model of theory-reduction (Sarkar
1992; Hoyningen-Huene 1989; Silberstein 2002), because it is a model
of explanatory reduction (Sarkar 1992), or because bridge-laws are to
be interpreted epistemologically (Fazekas 2009, following Klein 2009).
One reason is that Nagel was not “sympathetic to a
theory-independent realism about entities” (Sarkar 2015,
48).



Ideas similar to those of Nagel have been pursued, amongst others, by
Robert Causey and Lawrence Sklar (Sklar 1967). Causey’s model of
microreductions suggests that reductions are based in cross-theoretic
identities and are, in a sense, decompositional (Causey 1972a,b).
Kenneth Schaffner explicitly built upon Nagel’s model, extending
it especially to cover cases of correction and replacement.


2.3 Problems for Nagelian models of reduction



Many criticisms have been raised against both the original Nagel model
and its variants. The original Nagel model was faulted as too narrow
because it allows only for theory reduction (Wimsatt 1972; Hull 1976;
Darden & Maull 1977: 43; Sarkar 1992), whereas an appropriate
model would cover cases of reduction of mere models and the
like—sciences like biology and neuroscience should be regarded
as being possible candidates for reduction, although they do not
contain full-fledged theories (see also the entry on
 
reductionism in biology
;
 for a discussion of this and the following criticisms, see van Riel
2011).



In a more general sense, the Nagel model has been criticized as
exemplifying all the shortcomings of the orthodox view on science. For
example, it conceives of theories as syntactic entities, and it views
reduction as explanation cashed out in terms of the DN model (Hempel
& Oppenheim 1948), which has itself been challenged on many
grounds, especially those regarding the asymmetry of explanation (for
an overview that focuses on problems arising from reduction as
explanation, see Craver (2007: chap. 2), and for problems concerning
the DN model, see Salmon 1989).



The Nagel model describes reduction in terms of direct theory
explanation, whereas an appropriate model of reduction should shape
the notion in terms of indirect theory explanation, that is, in terms
of explanation of the phenomena of a theory (Kemeny & Oppenheim
1956; Schaffner 1967; Friedman 1982).



Three formal worries of the Nagel model merit mention: if reduction is
derivation plus (sometimes) bridge laws, then any theory would reduce
to itself (because any theory is derivable from itself); moreover, any
theory would reduce to any inconsistent theory; and contrary to what
one might expect, reduction would not turn out to be an asymmetric
relation—derivability does not entail asymmetry.



Feyerabend (1962, 1966), Churchland (1986), Schaffner (1993), and
Bickle (1998), amongst others, have argued that Nagel’s model
allows neither for correction in the reducing theory nor for
replacement, and that, therefore, it is fundamentally
misguided—which is based on a misrepresentation of Nagel (see
above).



Finally, Nagel’s model has been criticized for the role it
attributes to bridge-laws. New Wave reductionists in particular have
argued that bridge-laws do not play the role they are supposed to play
in discovering reduction-relations. Contrary to Nagel, we do not use
bridge-laws when discovering for example that parts of chemistry
reduce to atomic physics. Rather, we infer bridge-laws from the
discovery of relevant similarities between the two theories (for the
explanatory role of bridge-laws and identity statements, see also
Marras (2005: 351) and Block & Stalnaker (1999: 28)).



In response to those critiques, some, like Schaffner and
Dizadji-Bahmani et al. (2010) and Butterfield (2011a&b) have
developed variants of the Nagel model that retain its spirit but avoid
many of the problems faced by the original. Prominent suggestions
concern refinements of the logical framework in which Nagelian
reduction is described (Dizadji-Bahmani, Frigg, and Hartmann (2010)
and Butterfield (2011a)) as well as a relaxation of the condition that
reductions must be complete. Partial reductions are conceived of as
“largely completed reductions containing exceptions or failures
of attempted reductions” (Schaffner 2012: 563). An
interpretation of partial reductions for sciences such as biology has
been developed in Schaffner (2006) and further developed by Winther
(2009).



Others have rejected the Nagel model and used different frameworks to
account for reduction. The most relevant alternatives will be
discussed in the next sections.


2.4 Structuralist models of reduction



One alleged problem of Nagelian models is that they start from a
mistaken background view of science in that they conceive of theories
as syntactic objects and rely on dubious notions about the nature of
laws and theoretical terms. Structuralists tried to overcome these
alleged problems (as well as others, such as the problem of
incommensurability) by revising the notion of a theory.



Part of the classical structuralist program consists in the idea that
philosophy of science, properly construed, pursues an ideal of
rational reconstruction of science (cf. Stegmüller 1979; Balzer
1984: 331), which is to be understood as a reconstruction of actual
scientific developments. Since it is common knowledge that cases of
straightforward reductions are rare, if they exist at all,
structuralists focused primarily on cases of mere replacement or on
similarities between theories, which are cashed out in terms of
approximation or (semantic counterparts of) derivation under ideal
conditions (Moulines 1984; Scheibe 1999; Stegmüller 1979 &
1986: ch. 4).



According to the structuralist picture (Sneed 1971; further developed
in: Stegmüller 1979), to give an account of a theory 
T
 is to
define the predicate ‘_is a (model of) 
T
’ in
set-theoretical terms. A theory basically consists of a set 
M
, a
set of potential models 
M
P
, a set of potential partial models

MPP
 and a set of intended applications 
I
, which is
supposed to be “open”, or non-extensionally individuated.
The relation between the different variants or stages of 
I
 is, as
Stegmüller suggests, best thought of as being pragmatically fixed
(Stegmüller 1979). It is worth noting that structuralists believe
their models of reduction to be advantageous 
because
 they
believed their concept of a theory to be more appropriate. The general
status of structuralism is an important factor in assessing the
problems these models of reduction seem to face.


2.5 Problems for structuralist models of reduction



Schaffner has argued that the structuralist notion of reduction is too
weak a notion to be useful, and that (official) Nagelian reduction is
a special case of paradigmatic structuralist models (for instance:
Suppes 1967). Moreover, according to Schaffner, structuralist models
cover cases that should not be covered, namely, arbitrary reductions
(Schaffner 1967). The basic problem of these accounts has been
described by Moulines (1984: 55) and a similar idea can be found in
Hoering (1984). Moulines puts it as follows:





There is at least one further aspect of reduction that is overlooked
by [the structuralist conception]. This is what I would like to call
“the ontological aspect”. … [O]ne has to take into
account some sort of relation between the respective domains.
Otherwise … all we have is an ad hoc mathematical relationship
between two sets of structures, perhaps by chance having the
mathematical properties we require of reduction but not really telling
something about “the world”. (Moulines 1984: 55)





This is a problem Nagelian models do not face if they describe
bridge-laws in semantic terms, i.e., in terms of extensional or
intensional relations among the relevant predicates or kind terms.


2.6 “New Wave”-models of reduction



New Wave reductionists take it that their models give an appropriate
reconstruction of a specific kind of scientific development
(Churchland 1986: 279ff.; Bickle 1998: chapter 1). At the same time,
however, this movement is associated with a reductionist metaphysical
position. Arguing that neuroscience reduces or eliminates psychology,
some protagonists try to show that we should embrace an eliminative
form of reductionism about the mind (e.g., Paul Churchland 1981, 1985;
Patricia Churchland 1986; Bickle 1998). The so called New Wave model
(or better: a family of similar models), which was developed in a
series of articles and books by Clifford Hooker (1981), Paul
Churchland (1979, 1985) and more recently John Bickle (esp. 1998),
builds on some aspects of Schaffner’s current model (1993) and
its original version (Schaffner 1967). Here is a formulation of
Hooker’s definition:





Within 
T
B
 construct an analog, 
T
∗
R
, of 
T
R
 under
certain conditions 
C
R
 such that 
T
B
 and 
C
R
 entail

T
∗
R
 and argue that the analog relation, 
A
R
, between

T
∗
R
 and 
T
R
 warrants claiming (some kind of) reduction
relation, 
R
, between 
T
R
 and 
T
B
. Thus 
(
T
B
&
C
R
→
T
∗
R
)
 and 
(
T
∗
R
 
A
R
 
T
R
)
 warrants 
(
T
B
 
R
 
T
R
)
. (Hooker 1981: 49)





The conditions, 
C
R
, will consist of limiting assumptions and
boundary conditions that guarantee that if 
T
B
 is more
comprehensive than TR, the application of elements of 
T
B
’s
vocabulary is restricted to the domain relevant for 
T
R
. Ronald
Endicott (1998: 56) identifies four core aspects of New Wave
reduction: (i) “New Wave construction”: the corrected
version of the reduced theory is constructed within the vocabulary of
the reducing theory; (ii) “New Wave deduction”: this
corrected version is deduced from the reducing theory; (iii)
“New Wave relation”: analogical relations play the role
bridge-laws play within Nagelian models; (iv) “New Wave
continuum”: these analogical relations may differ in degree of
strength—reductions based on strong analogical relations justify
a conservative stand towards the (ontology of) the reduced science,
whereas reductions based on weak analogical relations justify
elimination. Identity (a limiting case for the continuum), for
example, ensures that the ontology of the reduced theory is preserved
by the reducing theory.



According to Bickle (1998: 29 & 1992: 224) and Paul Churchland
(1985: 11), avoiding reference to bridge-principles has a great
epistemological advantage: The epistemological virtue of reduction
does not depend upon knowledge of bridge-principles. Rather,
comparison of reduced and reducing theories justifies identity
claims.



New Wave reductionists typically allow for a great variety of
relations backing up the analogical relation established between

T
R
 and 
T
∗
R
. Reduction is associated with a space of
theory-relations ranging from “perfectly smooth” or
“retentive” reductions to “bumpy” reductions,
which are best understood as mere replacements (Bickle 1992: 223;
Hooker 1981: 45). Bickle describes smooth reductions as follows:
(‘
I
N
’ designates the derived image and
‘
T
O
’ designates the reduced or the “old”
theory):





In cases lying at or near the retentive endpoint, the 
I
N
 is the
exactly equipotent isomorphic image of the 
T
O
, and no
counterfactual limiting assumptions or boundary conditions are
required for the derivation of 
I
N
. (Bickle 1992: 223)





In this case, the pairing of the terms corresponds to identity of
referents (Bickle 1992: 224) and 
I
N
 can be directly obtained from

T
R
 (the reducing theory), whereas in cases on the opposite point
of the spectrum, pairing is achieved only by reference to
counterfactual limiting assumptions and boundary conditions. In this
case, ontology is eliminated, as in the reduction of phlogiston-theory
case.


2.7 Problems for “New Wave”-models of reduction



The main criticism raised against New Wave reductionism has been that
it either misses the target of reduction, or that it is not new at
all. Ronald Endicott argues that New Wave reductionists fail to
recognize the important distinction between 
mere
 replacements
on the one hand (that correspond to eliminativism, rather than
reductionism), and proper reductions on the other (Endicott 1998,
2001). Insofar as New Wave reductionists conceive of reduction in
terms of replacement, they just miss the target. If they conceive of
reduction in terms of smooth reductions, then, basically, they repeat
the Nagelian model in new dress (see also Dizadji Bahmani et al.
(2010).


2.8 Reduction and mechanisms



The recent debate on mechanistic explanation took its point of
departure in reflections on sciences other than physics. Most
proponents of a mechanistic turn in the philosophy of explanation
oppose a number of mainstream interpretations of core notions in the
philosophy of science, especially that of a scientific explanation, a
law, the layer-cake model of a hierarchy of sciences (Wimsatt 1976),
and the notion of a theory. Most often, mechanistic explanation is
characterized as (i) being related to the use of ‘by’
rather than ‘because’ (Craver 2007), (ii) being such that
the functioning of a complex entity is explained in terms of the
coordinated activation of its constituents, (iii) by being tied to a
hierarchical order of local mechanisms, whose constituents can
themselves become the target of a mechanistic explanation, and (iv) by
the relevance of the notion of organization—mechanisms are
organized to do something. This is how Craver puts it:





Mechanistic explanations are constitutive or componential
explanations: they explain the behavior of the mechanism as a whole in
terms of the organized activities and interactions of its components.
(Craver 2007: 128)





A number of aspects concerning the relation between reduction and
mechanistic explanation are dealt with in the entry on
 
reductionism in biology
.
 Thus, suffice it to say that some philosophers, like Craver, reject a
reductionist interpretation of mechanistic explanation (Craver 2007),
whereas others seem to suggest that a conservative form of
reductionism may be compatible with mechanistic explanation (Bechtel
2007 and, especially, Schaffner 2006). Interestingly, the example of
the reduction of headaches as described by Nagel (see above,
 
Section 1
)
 seems to suggest that he conceives of reductive explanation as
mechanistic explanation. This is consonant with his first publication
on reduction: In his early paper on reduction (Nagel 1935), he
describes reduction as a constitution relation. Van Riel (2014)
suggests that reductive explanation is a cognate of mechanistic
explanation. We will return to a similar idea developed by Endicott
(2022) when discussing functional reduction.


3. Models of scientific reduction in the philosophy of mind



Reductionist positions have gained attention within the philosophy of
mind in four main respects. Firstly, type-identity theory was proposed
as a reductionist position about the mind. Secondly, token-identity
theories are sometimes conceived of as being reductionist in spirit as
well. Thirdly, models of functional reduction have been intensively
discussed. And, finally and corresponding to the previous
distinctions, there are different conceptions of reduction that are
discussed and rejected by non-reductive physicalism.


3.1 Type-identity theories



Type-identity theory claims that for types of some domain 
D
1
,
(e.g., psychology) there are types of a domain 
D
2
 (e.g.,
neuroscience) such that for any member 
x
 of 
D
1
, there is a
member 
y
 of 
D
2
 such that 
x
=
y
. This aspect is revealed in
the theory’s name—it is 
type-identity
 theory. It
is not just the items falling under the types that are said to be
identical but also the types themselves; e.g., being a pain is said to
be the very same type as being a certain pattern of neural firing.
However, just to claim that for any type 
x
 of some domain 
D
1
,
there is a type 
y
 of a domain 
D
2
 such that 
x
=
y
 does not
make you a type-identity theorist. Rather, it is a specific
reductionist as well as a naturalist stance that accompany these
identity-claims that make them proper “type-identity”
claims.



The main concern was to defend this position against various
counterarguments. The question of what exactly makes this position

reductive
 did not receive considerable attention. Primarily,
this theory is a monistic theory; but monism is not identical to
reductionism. Herbert Feigl gives the following characterization of
type-identity theory when answering the question of “whether the
mental and the physical can in some sense be identified”:





[I]t is proper to speak of “identification […]”.
Concepts of molar behavior theory like habit strength, expectancy,
drive, instinct, memory trace, repression, superego, etc., may yet be
identified in a future psychophysiology with specific types of
neural-structure-and-process patterns. (Feigl 1967: 77)





This quote suggests a connection between type-identity theories and
models of theory-reduction: It suggests that reduction, understood as
an inter-theory relation, is closely related to type-identity theory.
The idea seems to be this: Within a future psychophysiology, the fact
that mental types are identical to physiological types might be
revealed, and the nature of mental states will ultimately be given in
terms of psychophysiology, rather then in terms of psychology. Similar
positions have been held by Place (1956), who primarily speaks of
constitution rather than identity, whereas Smart explicitly stated
this thesis in terms of identity (Smart 1959).


3.2 Token-identity theories



Type-identity theory was largely, though not completely, abandoned
when arguments from multiple realizability were put forward to show
that due to the fact that at least some mental kinds can be multiply
realized—that is: instantiated in different physiological
kinds—an identification of mental with physiological kinds is
impossible. Still, this left space for token-identity theories,
according to which any mental kind is physically instantiated. The
identity is that of the objects or items that are of the two types or
that possess the two relevant properties, even though the types or
properties themselves are not identical; e.g., one and the same item
might have both mental and neural properties. The bearers of those
properties, i.e., the items falling under the types, are identical,
but the properties or types themselves are distinct. Token-identity
theory is still a reductionist position in that it opposes any form of
interactionist substance-dualism, substance-parallelism, and
substance-epiphenomenalism. Even though it is not a very common term,
in the literature, we sometimes find variants of the expression
‘token reduction’ (Cartwright 1999: 32ff.; Hooker 1981:
part III; Bickle 1998: 223ff.).



Token-identity theories perfectly match weak interpretations of theory
reduction. If for reduction, bridge-laws that state correlations or
merely extensional relations are sufficient (Richardson 1979), or if
bridge-laws are not laws in any robust sense, (Klein 2009; Dizadji
Bahmani et al. 2010) then token-identity may be sufficient for
Nagelian theory reduction.



Token-identity theories also match theory-reduction according to
Schaffner’s and the New Wave reductionist’s models. Within
these models, token-identity theories do not back up strong or
perfectly smooth cases of reduction, but they nevertheless support
reductions that are stronger than those that are merely extreme cases
of replacement, not involving correction in any robust sense.


3.3 Local reductions and disjunctive kinds



Anti-reductionist arguments based on the assumption that mental kinds
are multiply realizable have been attacked on at least two different
grounds.



Clapp (2001) and Walter (2006) argued that high-level kinds can be
legitimately identified with disjunctive kinds. The high-level type is
identical to a kind we can refer to by a term consisting of a
disjunction of expressions each of which refers to one of the
different low-level kinds that realize the high-level kind: 
H
x
=
(
L
1
x
 or 
L
2
x
 or 
…
 or 
L
n
x
)
. We may be able to specify
the relevant term only in principle in cases where the disjunction is
infinitely long. This strategy is also pertinent in Dizadji Bahmani et
al. 2010.



An alternative strategy suggested by David Lewis (1969, 1972) and
developed by Jaegwon Kim argues in favor of local reductions (Kim
1992). High-level kinds are multiply realized in virtue of the fact
that different physical kinds play the required role in different
organisms, systems or contexts. Thus, if we individuate the high-level
kinds in a more fine-grained way, we can save a weaker form of
type-identity theory. Even though kind 
K
 might be multiply
realized by kinds 
P
1
,
P
2
,
…
,
P
n
, there are more specific
contexts 
C
1
,
C
2
,
…
,
C
n
, such that in each context 
C
i
,
only one physical kind 
P
i
 plays the role of 
K
 in that
context. Thus we make more local or contextual identifications. For
example, pain in general may not be identical with any one neural
kind, but we may be able to reductively identify human-pain with one
neural kind, lizard-pain with a second neural kind and octopus-pain
with a third. The relevant context could be species-specific,
individual-specific or even specific for conditions of occurrence
within an individual.



This idea was further developed by Brian Loar (1981: ch. 4), Jackson,
Pargetter and Prior (1982), and Michael Esfeld and Christian Sachse
(Sachse 2007; Esfeld and Sachse 2007). Esfeld and Sachse (2007) and
Sachse (2007) describe how this insight can be accommodated within the
high-level science by constructing fine-grained versions of the
high-level types—so called ‘functional
sub-types’—which can then be linked to the relevant
low-level kinds, using the resources of high-level science.


3.4 Functional reduction



Functionalism about properties of a given sort is the view that such
properties are functional in nature. For example: Functionalism about
the 
mental
 is the view that 
mental properties
 are
functional. Intuitively, a functional property is a property whose
nature, essence or significance is fully captured by a description of
the role it plays within a system. Versions of functionalism can be
distinguished with respect to the sort of role they attribute to
functional properties and the sorts of resources required to specify
those roles. The relevant roles might be specified solely in terms of
causal input-output relations. Alternatively, they can be conceived of
in terms of relationally defined computational states (computational
functionalism), or in terms of goal-directed interactions
(teleological functionalism) (cf. Block forthcoming; Lycan 1987; Van
Gulick 1980; Sober 1990).



‘Functional reduction’ signifies a family of models which
are concerned with the reduction of such causal, computational, or
goal-related properties. These models describe reduction as consisting
of a relation between a functional property 
P
 and a structural or
substrate property 
P
∗
 that plays the role determined by the
functional property 
P
, or at least does in a restricted class of
systems or contexts.



Some functionalists assume that the functional property 
P
 and the
property that plays the 
P
-role, 
P
∗
, are identical. On this
view (also called ‘
filler
-’,
‘
realizer’ or
‘occupant-functionalism
’) a specification of the
relevant role—typically obtained by a logical construction (the
so called “Ramsey sentence”) from the theory containing a
predicate that signifies this property—merely serves as a
description to pick out the property that plays the functional role in
the actual world. That is, ‘
P
’ refers to the
underlying property that actually plays the role, namely 
P
∗
.
Others (so called ‘role-functionalists’) assume that the
functional property 
P
 is a “higher order” property; it
is simply the property of playing the relevant role and is not to be
identified with any given underlying property 
P
∗
 that does so. On
this view, 
P
∗
 merely 
realizes P
; it is not identical
with 
P
. Given its denial of property identity, this latter view
seems less apt to a reductionist interpretation. However, there may be
means by which the higher-order properties might be logically
constructed from lower-order ones that count as reductive (Putnam
1970).



Thus functional reduction is primarily concerned with the connection
between reduction and the metaphysics of specific properties, namely,
functional ones. That is: 
prima facie
, it is compatible (if
compatible at all, cf. Block 
forthcoming
) with various
definitions of reduction. It can be incorporated within a Nagelian
framework (Esfeld and Sachse 2007), and it matches New-Wave
reductionist ideas. Occupant-functionalism can be regarded as being
compatible even with classical type-identity theory. Thus, models of
functional reduction do not give sui-generis models of reduction;
rather, they can be regarded as yielding detailed theories about how
functional properties behave with respect to reduction. In short, the
question addressed under the heading of ‘functional
reduction’ is this: How do functional properties fit into a
reductionist perspective?



If the following three are true: mental properties are functional in
nature, occupant-functionalism is correct, and the role of mental
properties is played by physiological properties, then mental
properties reduce in a straightforward sense to physiological
properties. Alternatively, it has been suggested that even if
identification of the functional property with its realizer is not
always possible, a reduction of such properties can still be achieved,
either by way of local reductions (Kim 1993), by way of the reduction
to disjunctive kinds (Clapp 2001; Walter 2006), or by way of the
reduction of functional sub-types (Esfeld and Sachse 2007).



Recently Endicott (2022), building on Kim (2005), has argued for what
he calls 
part-based functional reduction
. Even in cases of
functional reductions where the reduced property is identical to the
reducing property, one can and should add decompositional, part-whole
explanations. The functional behavior of the reduced property is
explained in terms of the properties of constituents of the base
property and their properties. So, functional reductions become part
of a larger explanatory project, where property identification is
complemented by decompositional explanations, referring to part-whole
relations.



Others have argued that functionalism best suits non-reductive
physicalism in the following sense: It maintains the
naturalist’s intuition that there is unity among the underlying
property-realizers which are all ultimately physical; hence, token
identity theory is true. Nevertheless, it opens the possibility to
accommodate the threat of multiple realizability in a particular way:
Functional kinds can be multiply realized, and, hence, they can be
regarded as being distinct from the lower-level physical properties.
Moreover, if a pragmatic dimension is incorporated in the conception
of functionalism, functionalism seems to contradict reductionist
interpretations; it may be impossible as a matter of practice to
specify the relevant roles using only the resources of the lower-level
theories (cf. Van Gulick 2010).



Thus, differing models of functionalism and functional reduction might
be used to either justify or 
criticize
 various forms of
reduction
ism
.


4. Definitions of ‘_reduces to_’



As discussed above, the term ’reduction’ can be
interpreted in many ways. These rival explications can be
distinguished (i) with respect to how they conceive of the

relata
 of the reduction relation, and (ii) with respect to
how they conceive of the 
conditions
 the relevant relata have
to meet in order to instantiate the relation. Often, an epistemic
aspect complements these characterizations. This section groups the
rival accounts with respect to the objects they offer as candidate
relata, and with respect to the links they offer as candidates for the
conditions the relata have to meet in order to instantiate the
reduction relation. Three remarks are in place:



In what follows, only candidates for the 
primary relata
 of
the reduction relation are listed; it is the 
primary
 relata
with respect to which philosophers disagree. The distinction between

primary
 and 
secondary relata
 can be explained by way
of example: Patricia Churchland holds that





[s]tatements that a phenomenon 
P
R
 reduces to another phenomenon

P
B
 are derivative upon the more basic claim that the theory that
characterizes the first reduces to the theory that characterizes the
second. (Churchland 1986: 278)





On this view, the relation signified by the reduction-predicate in its
basic, or proper use is instantiated by pairs of theories only. A

derivative
 notion of reduction (and, hence, a deviant use of
the predicate) allows for statements of the form ‘
a
 reduces
to 
b
’ to be true, even if the respective instances of
‘
a
’ and ‘
b
’ do not designate theories.
The truth of this statement then depends upon a corresponding truth
about theory-reduction. For example, if water reduces to H
2
O,
then on this view it does so 
only if, and if so: in virtue of the
fact that
 folk-chemistry reduces to chemistry.



On the other side of the spectrum, those who view reduction in terms
of real world entities rather than theories would not claim that
statements of the form ‘
a
 reduces to 
b
’ are always
false when the instances of ‘
a
’ and
‘
b
’ designate theories, and true only when they
designate properties, or parts and wholes. Rather, they would hold
that claims about theory-reductions are derivative upon claims about
property-reductions or that the notion of theory reduction depends
upon a notion of property reduction in a more ontological sense. Thus
if folk-chemistry reduces to chemistry, it does so 
because

water reduces to H
2
O, and 
because
 Iron reduces to Fe,
and so on.



Secondly, this way of conceiving of the primary relata of reduction
suggests that the reduction-relation is a binary relation. Recall,
however, the observation that on Nagel’s account, in heterogenic
cases of reduction, no theory reduces to another theory

simpliciter
; it does so only with respect to certain
bridge-laws and/or boundary conditions. Depending on how one counts
the arity of a relation, i.e., the number of items it relates, this
might suggest that even on the classical interpretation, reduction is
not a binary relation. More recently, alternative explications have
been suggested according to which reduction is of an arity higher than
2. Thus, the intuitive notion of primary relata should be tied to the
designata of the expressions flanking the reduction predicate in true
reduction statements.



Finally, talking about candidate relata, we talk about 
types

of objects that possibly function as the relata of an instance of the
reduction-relation, rather than these objects themselves.


4.1 Representational and ontological reduction



Many reductionist views seem to involve ontological claims. If one
denies classical substance-dualism and advocates a version of
reductionism rather than eliminativism for minds, persons and mental
state, then one seems to assert that 
objects
 or

substances
 reduce to 
objects
. If one rejects any
dualistic parallelism of mental and physical events and advocates a
version of reductionism rather than eliminativism for events such as
perceivings, willings or pain events, then one seems to assert that

events
 may reduce to 
events
. If one denies
property-dualism, and advocates a version of reductionism regarding
properties such as that of being a person or of being a pain, then one
seems to be committed to the assumption that 
properties

reduce to 
properties
. These different candidate-relata share
one important feature: They are non-representational in nature
(ignoring cases of objects that are used as vehicles for
representations); they are real world items, not representations about
items in the world. Especially in the philosophy of mind, these
candidate relata have received special attention.



In contrast, most classical explications of reduction developed in the
philosophy of science treat the reduction relation to be primarily
instantiated by representational entities, such as theories or models.
Building on these two lines of thought, one can, following Van Gulick
(2001), draw a distinction between representational and
non-representational relata of the reduction relation, and accordingly
between 
representational
 and 
ontological
 reduction.
Representational reduction is reduction cashed out as a relation
between representational devices, like theories or concepts;
ontological reduction is a relation defined in terms of ontic links
between the things theories or concepts are about. Representational
reduction is sometimes referred to as “epistemological
reduction” (Silberstein 2002, Sarkar 1992, Brigandt and Love
2012, Hoyningen-Huene 1989).



A brief survey of the candidate-relata should thus pair them with the
candidate relations that best fit each in turn (Van Gulick 2001).


4.2 Theories



The most prominent candidates are 
theories
. On the classical
interpretation, theories are sets of sentences. In Nagel’s
spirit:






Theory-Reduction I
:


x
 reduces to 
y
 if and only if 
x
 is a theory & 
y

is a theory & 
∃
z
, such that 
z
 is a set of
bridge-laws & 
(
y
,
z
⊢
x
)





Depending on how bridge-laws are characterized (epistemically,
semantically, metaphysically, or syntactically), a full-blown
characterization of the link might or might not be a purely syntactic
affair: If, for example, appropriate bridge-laws state
property-identifications, or relations among the predicates’
extensions, then the characterization of the reductive link contains a
metaphysical aspect.



On a structuralist interpretation, theories are complex
model-structures. Here, mapping-relations play the role derivation is
supposed to play on the syntactic interpretation of theories. We thus
get (schematically, since the relevant function 
f
 is left
unspecified):






Theory-Reduction II
:


x
 reduces to 
y
 if and only if 
x
 is a theory & 
y

is a theory & 
(
f
(
y
)
=
x
)





The conditions on this function differ according to different
accounts; however, the function is characterized solely in structural
terms. It is supposed to capture a relevant similarity relation
between the respective theories, such as a structural isomorphism
(Suppes 1967; Sneed 1971). Moulines’ criticism that this picture
of reduction lacks an ontological link to rule out arbitrary
reductions (Moulines 1984) reflects the idea that bridge-laws
shouldn’t be given a purely structural interpretation.


4.3 Models



The notion of a model is also used more widely outside structuralist
interpretations of scientific theories. Given that the common
interpretation of classical conceptions of reduction requires the
relata to be fully fledged theories, it is not clear how sciences such
as biology, psychology, and neuroscience fit into the picture. In
these areas, such imperfect, highly idealized or merely approximately
correct models dominate theorizing, and often model-descriptions are
accompanied by visualizations, which might raise further questions as
to the applicability of purely or mainly syntactic notions of
reduction (Bechtel & Abrahamsen 2005). Definitions of reduction
directed at model-based theorizing are often described in ontological
terms: It is the mechanisms, or phenomena captured by the models that
allegedly reduce. The models themselves reduce only in a derivative
sense (a discussion of these and related issues is covered in the
entry on
 
reductionism in biology
.)



If, on the other hand, structuralist reconstructions of
“imperfect” theories are successful, then model-reductions
might be covered by 
Theory-Reduction II
. Moreover, it has
been argued that Nagel’s model should not be interpreted too
strictly; at least, it maybe was intended to cover model-reductions as
well (van Riel 2011).


4.4 Concepts



Reduction may also apply to concepts, where concepts are conceived of
loosely as whatever is expressed by a meaningful term, or as the
cognitively significance of a linguistic representation, or in Fregean
terms as the mode of presentation under which an object is given by a
representation.



Whereas models and theories as candidate-relata for reduction received
considerable attention in the philosophy of science, within the
philosophy of mind reduction as a conceptual issue also played a major
role.


4.4.1 Conceptual issues and analytic functionalism



One such view is tied to functionalism, although this connection is
mainly implicit: If a functional description of a property can be
obtained from an 
analysis
 of a functional 
concept
,
then conceptual issues play an important role in the

epistemology
 of functional reduction. On one standard version
of functionalism, it is conceptual analysis which provides the
functionalist with the specification of the functional roles defining
mental properties that are needed to carry out the reduction. The
condition on analytic functional reduction is thus (schematically)
this:






Analytic Functional Reduction
:


P
1
 reduces to 
P
2
 only if instances of 
P
2
 play role

R
 and it is a conceptual truth (or analytic) that whatever
instantiates 
P
1
 plays role 
R
.




4.4.2 Conceptual issues and the explanatory gap



Another motivation for believing that conceptual issues are crucial
for reduction stems from the idea that the identity of properties or
kinds expressed by two predicates 
P
1
 and 
P
2
 manifests in the
fact that there is an a priori route from 
P
1
 to 
P
2
. This
interpretation is implicit in the received view attacked early on by
Smart (1959). It also plays a role in Levine 1993, 1998 and Chalmers
1996; the idea is that for reductions to be explanatory, they must not
leave out any aspect of the phenomenon to be explained. If
qualia-concepts or concepts of conscious states pick out mental states
in terms of features that cannot be fully explained in terms of the
vocabulary of the reducing science, the explanation and hence the
reduction is not successful. Even if our mental terms and neural terms
refer to the same states, if the former pick them out using mental
concepts that cannot be neurally explained, we will not have reduced
the mental to the neural. There will be a residual explanatory gap
(Levine 1993, 1998).



Thus, even if two theories instantiate a relation of the sort required
by Nagel’s model, we should not speak of proper reduction, if as
a matter of epistemic possibility the connection between the domains
of the two theories remains too loose to support the materialist
claims. Levine (1993) gives this an epistemological interpretation;
Chalmers (1996) seems to suggest that the epistemic possibility of two
concepts coming apart implies that there is a metaphysical possibility
of the two properties coming apart. Many (e.g., Block & Stalnaker
1999; Van Gulick 1999; Yablo 1999) have criticized this view.



This a priori link can, following Beckermann (2009: 162), be described
as an a priori implication of the truth of the reduced science,
theory, or framework by the truth of the reducing science, theory, or
framework:






A Priori Reduction-1:


P
1
 reduces to 
P
2
 only if the set of all truths about the
relevant domain employing concepts of the 
P
2
-framework
conceptually implies the set of truth formulated using concepts of the

P
1
-framework.





This way of putting it relies on an intuitive understanding of
different conceptual frameworks. Stronger versions require there to be
a conceptual connection between pairs of properties (Jackson 2005). At
least under some interpretations, this apriorist view has clear
predecents in early considerations about the unity of science.


4.4.3 Conceptual issues and the unity of science



According to Carnap, scientific unification should be effected by way
of a theory that has the same expressive power as the reduced
theories, and, hence, by 
translation
.





… science is a unity, [such] that all empirical statements can
be expressed in a single language, all states of affairs are of one
kind and are known by the same method. (Carnap 1934: 32)





The notion of translation relevant here is not particularly precise;
however, as long as the notion of 
expressing
 the same thing
is not fully captured by that of 
designating
 the same thing,
then reference to conceptual aspects of language obviously plays a
role for this view on reduction. A particularly strong version, though
apparently not Carnap’s, is this (this schematic conditional is
restricted to properties signified by predicates, which makes the
condition easier to formulate):






A Priori Reduction-2
:

 The property signified by the predicate 
‘_
F
’

reduces to the property
signified by predicate 
‘_
G
’

only if it is conceptually necessary that whatever is 
F
 is 
G
,
and vice versa.





The demand for conceptually necessary links echoes the position of
Smart’s (1959) anonymous opponent who claims that if a type

T
 is identical to a type 
T
∗
, then a corresponding conceptual
relation holds between expressions signifying these types. Oppenheim
and Putnam (1958) seem to think if this kind of reduction when they
describe what they call “epistemological reduction” as
reduction “true in virtue of the meanings of the terms
involved”. (1958: 3)


4.4.4 Conceptual issues and the pragmatic dimension of reductions



Van Gulick (1992, 2010) highlights another aspect of the relevance of
conceptual considerations for models of reduction. He suggests that
conceptual issues might play a role for reduction insofar as their
pragmatic function is concerned. People use representational devices,
such as concepts, but also theories, models, and expressions, in order
to successfully deal with objects in specific contexts. The
directedness of a representation is not exhausted by the object it
represents; a representation is typically embedded in a context in
which it is used for a certain purpose. The way the first-person
perspective enables us to evaluate and deal with our mental states
seems to be radically different from ways in which a third person
perspective could enable us to deal with these states.


4.4.5 Conceptual issues and the a posteriority requirement



The idea that reference to concepts is required by any appropriate
explication of the reduction-predicate is also implicit in
Nagel’s work (Nagel 1961): Nagel describes bridge-laws as being

a posteriori
, thereby opposing any sort of analytic or other
a priori reductionism. It has been argued that this might be crucial
for fully understanding the concept of reduction. If so, then
reduction turns out to be a four-place relation, involving not only
entities but also the concepts by which they are picked out or
referred to. Truth conditions for sentences of the form ‘
a

reduces to 
b
’, where the expressions ‘
a
’ and
‘
b
’ designate properties, events, phenomena or the
like, are sensitive not only to what ‘
a
’ and
‘
b
’ designate but also to how they do so, i.e., to the
concepts or modes of presentation ‘
a
’ and
‘
b
’ express (van Riel 2010, 2013 & 2014; Jenkins
2011). But perhaps, reduction, construed as a more general phenomenon,
including foundationalism in mathematics and decompositional
conceptual analysis, is neutral in this respect. Then, a posteriori
reductions could be characterized by the fact that the concepts
representing the primary relata in a reduction statement present them
in a way that makes an a priori reduction impossible (for us). If heat
reduces to molecular kinetic enegry, then whatever the relation
between the kind heat and molecular kinetic energy, the concepts
employed in this statement are not transparent with respect to the
fact that heat reduces to molecular kinetic energy.


4.5 Properties



Consider the example of pain reducing to C-fiber stimulation. Under
one interpretation, the expressions ‘pain’ and
‘C-fiber stimulation’ pick out abstract objects, namely
natural kinds, properties or types. On this reading of ‘pain
reduces to C-fiber stimulation’, the primary relata of reduction
should be conceived of as properties or types. This view has played an
important role in the philosophy of mind, underlying classical
versions of type-identity theory and being the main target of
anti-reductionist’s counter-attacks (Putnam 1967; Fodor 1974,
1997).


4.5.1 Property-identity



What sort of reductive link might suit those who assume that the
primary relata of reduction are properties? Doing justice to the idea
that if some 
a
 reduces to some 
b
, then 
a
 does not exist
over and above 
b
, one might tend to assume that property-reduction
requires identity:






Identity reduction:
 
P
1
 reduces to 
P
2
 only if 
P
1
=
P
2
.





This condition is, under a certain interpretation, what underlies
Nagelian bridge-principles (van Riel 2011, see however Sarkar 2015 for
a different interpretation). It is also explicitly endorsed by Robert
Causey (1972a, b, 1977), who connects it to theory reduction via
micro-reductions. Just as in the writings of Smart (1959, 1963), the
idea is that the relevant identities are not a priori. In addition, he
suggests that by identifying the relevant kinds, attributes and
properties of the reduced theory with kinds, attributes and properties
of the reducing theory, we arrive at explanatory reduction because the
laws of the respective theories will thereby be shown to be
nomologically equivalent (Causey 1974: 5).




Identity Reduction

 is, at the same time, obviously compatible with various sorts of

a-priorism
. Moreover, it has been suggested that it offers a
possible way to escape the explanatory gap: If some mental state just
is some physical state, then there is nothing to be explained about
how “these states” connect; it is a sheer misunderstanding
to ask for more than just the identity-statement. Identity claims are
basic in the sense that they cannot be successfully explained in the
relevant sense (Block & Stalnaker 1999). As is well known, it is
often hard to decide whether or not we are faced with identity or mere
correlation; Wimsatt (1976: 697ff) argues that when we conceive of
reduction as a scientific process, we are well advised to interpret
apparent correlations as identities.



van Riel (2014) has argued that the idea that reduction is relevantly
tied to identity generates a puzzle: Intuitively, identity seemingly
contradicts the directionality, or what is sometimes called
‘asymmetry’ of reduction. The suggested solution is that
‘_reduces to_’ generates hyper-intensional contexts, and
that this is best explained by the idea mentioned above: For 
a
 to
reduce to 
b
, two conditions must be satisfied: (i) 
a
=
b
 and
(ii) ‘
a
’ expresses a conceptual content that
relevantly differs from the conceptual content expressed by
‘
b
’. Another option would consist in giving this a
pragmatist reading as in (Van Gulick 1992, 2010), or giving up on the
idea that identity is required for (property-)reduction.


4.5.2 Alternatives to property-identity



There are three rival suggestions on the market, all of which argue
that weaker notions of reduction still serve the purpose of the
reductivist: The reductive link could be spelled out in terms of
supervenience (Kim 1982, 1990), causation (Enç 1976) and
realization (Kim 1998; Melnyk 2003; Shoemaker 2007. Whereas usual
stipulations of supervenience do not rule out the possibility that

a
 supervenes on 
b
 and, at the same time, 
b
 supervenes on

a
, at least causation seems to be relevantly directional and so do
justice to the directionality of reduction. Nevertheless, causation is
probably not what is required: the occurrence of water is not

caused
 by the occurrence of H
2
O (in the usual meaning of
the term ‘causation’); there is no temporal component
involved, what is, on most accounts, required by causation.


4.5.3 Supervenience



Supervenience does not fare better, though for different reasons: It
seems to be too weak a notion to capture the idea that guided
reduction-talk, although it surely is a necessary condition for
reduction. In a sense, if mental states merely supervene on
physiological states, they exist in a straightforward sense over and
above the latter. Such supervenient states are dependent; but being
dependent is not enough for reduction (Kim 1998). Note that this is,
up to a certain point, a matter of stipulation. However, the
stipulation is driven by an intuition: An appropriate definition of
the reduction-predicate should adequately mimic the intuitions that
guided the use of the term. If, for example, one hope was to formulate
a strictly monist position, then relying on supervenience does not
serve this goal: Supervenience makes room for a weak form of dualism.
For example, it is compatible with emergent property dualism. The
emergent properties on such a view are something over and above the
physical, but in so far they emerge from the physical base according
to natural laws of emergence, they would supervene on that base. Any
two cases in which the physical bases were the same would also agree
in their emergent properties. Thus supervenience is generally not
judged sufficient for reduction. However, many regard it as consistent
with reduction or even required.


4.5.4 Realization



Realization, which has figured prominently in recent versions of
non-reductive physicalism may seem too weak a relation to support a
reduction claim, but nonetheless strong enough to guarantee
ontological unity on the token level that underlies physicalism.
Realization can be described in terms of dependence; e.g., for a
particular physiological event-type to realize pain is for it to be
such that in virtue of its physiological organization, its instances
play the pain-role. This obviously suits the (role-) functionalist
interpretation of higher-level properties; these higher-level
properties are realized by lower level ones in the sense that
instances of the latter play the role of the former in virtue of their
physical organization.



Most functionalists, being opposed to type-identity theory, regard the
realization-relation as too weak a relation for reduction. Given a
strong interpretation of what reductionism consists in—e.g., the
type-identity of properties – the realization-interpretation
might not suffice to guarantee reduction. It might ensure reductionism
at the token-level, but it might, at the same time, be committed to
dualism at the property level—though perhaps only a relatively
innocent form of dualism. Options to reconcile role-functionalism with
reductionism have been introduced in
 
Section 3.4.




4.6 Wholes and their parts



The idea that reduction is tied to part-whole relations is frequently
alluded to in the literature (Schaffner 1993; van Riel 2014; Gillett
2016; Endicott 2022). The most elaborate version of this assumption
forms part of Causey’s more general picture of scientific
unification. Intuitively, and abstracting away from numerous details
of his elaborate model (described in terms of theory-reduction), a
micro-reduction in Causey’s sense relies on an identification of
a property 
P
1
 with a property 
P
2
, where the syntactical
arrangement of the terms forming the complex term
‘
P
2
’ reflect the mereological composition of 
P
1
,
whereas ‘
P
1
’ does not. ‘
P
1
’ simply
refers to the whole without explicitly referring to its parts as
‘
P
2
’ does, but they in fact refer to the same
complex. Whereas mereological relations alone are compatible with
emergentist or dualist interpretations combining mereological
composition and identity seems to ensure a link strong enough to count
as a reductive link.



Another way of connecting reduction to composition is this: one could
try to describe reduction as a one-many relation. In one use of the
term ‘composes’, a given object 
a
 may be composed out
of several objects 
b
1
,
b
2
,
b
3
,
…
,
b
n
. At least at the
face of it, there is nothing in the use of ‘reduction’
that should prevent us from, say, stating that a whole reduces to its
parts.



Recently, Carl Gillet (2016) has offered an account of reduction and
emergence using a bottom-up strategy: developing a general framework
of analysis for compositional explanations offered in the sciences, he
not only argues that the reduction debate should be reconstructed
paying close attention to actual explanations offered in the sciences,
but also that reductionism and emergentism are both live options.


4.7 Mechanisms



One solution to this problem would be to connect reductive explanation
to mechanistic explanation, even though mechanistic explanation is
often described by its proponents as non-reductivist in spirit
(Kauffmann 1970; Cummins 1975, 1983, 2000; Bechtel & Richardson
1993; Bechtel 1994; Glennan 1996; Machamer et al. 2000; Craver 2005,
2007).



The proposal would be to define a phenomenon 
a
 as reductively
explained by a phenomenon 
b
 
iff
 
a
 is mechanistically
explained by 
b
. Mechanistic dependence might be distinguished from
a mereological relation, if mechanisms are not the sorts of things
that have parts in the ordinary sense of the term as some have claimed
(Craver 2005).


5. Unresolved issues



The mainstream in the philosophy of mind is, apparently, one version
or another of non-reductive physicalism. The majority within the
philosophy of science has nowadays abandoned the unificationist
program, to which reduction was intimately connected right from the
start. However, as became apparent only in recent years, some
questions regarding the concept of reduction have not successfully
been accounted for yet, and recent developments in metaphysics in
connection with metaphysical grounding may shed new light on the
concept of reduction.


5.1 A priori reductions



Canonical examples from the philosophy of mind and the philosophy of
science suggest that reductions are not an a priori affair. However,
the question of whether, and if so, how reduction statements might be
knowable a priori raises subtle issues in different contexts.



Carnap tied reductivist unification to translation, and, thus,

meaning
. If, first, reduction is, or can be, effected by
translation, and if, second, translation preserves meaning, and if,
third, meaning-preservation is sufficient for a priori accessibility
(perhaps because it ensures analyticity), then reduction can in
principle be based on a priori reasoning. It should be noted, however,
that tying reduction to translation does not 
ipso facto

commit one to an a priory approach to reduction. It does so only if
the concept of meaning is relatively demanding. Carnap was very clear
about the fact that reductive unification may be achieved by something
less than definability: conditional reduction statements determine
application conditions for reduced terms under specific, typically
experimental circumstances (Carnap 1938 [1991], 397f.). It is not
clear whether these reduction statements are a priori. And on some
truth-conditional or Russellian accounts of meaning, the sentence
“This is a glass filled with H
2
O molecules” may turn
out to be a translation of the sentence “This is a glass filled
with water”. Then, translation ensures neither analyticity nor a
priori access.



The term ‘reduction’ has been employed in other areas as
well, for instance in the philosophy of mathematics and in
meta-philosophy. Foundationalism in mathematics can be regarded as
reductionist in spirit; and decompositional conceptual analysis (as
in: knowledge is nothing but justified true belief) can be described
as conceptual reduction. Prima facie, these kinds of reduction differ
from reductions in the sciences and in the philosophy of mind in
precisely this respect: if successful, they can be carried out on an a
priori basis. In contrast, the reduction of heat to molecular kinetic
energy requires empirical investigation, just like the reduction of
pain to some complex physiological state.



Unlike foundationalism in mathematics and reductive conceptual
analysis, the doctrine of a priori physicalism does not take the
process of discovering reduction statements to be an a priori project.
Roughly, according to a priori physicalism, every true proposition
about the empirical world is the consequence of at least one true
conditional that fulfills two conditions: it is knowable a priori and
its antecedent is a proposition about a (complex) physical or
fundamental material fact. A priori comparison of mathematical
structures, however, may suffice to determine an interesting
relationship between theories, which is sometimes labeled
‘reduction’. Rosaler (2019) has recently argued that to
achive proper reductions within physics, this kind of a priori
reasoning has to be complemented by empirical observation so as to
arrive at successful reductions.


5.2 Reduction and explanation



Philosophers do not agree upon the relation between reduction and
explanation. Some argue that the concept of reduction is on a par with
concepts such as causation in that it is intimately tied to certain
‘because’, ‘in virtue of’ or ‘by’
statements, or that there is no fundamental split between explanatory
and ontological models of reduction (van Riel 2011; McCauley 1981).
Others have held that not only is there a difference between
explanatory reduction, which is an epistemological matter, and
ontological reductionism, but that there might even be a difference
between explanatory reduction and derivation-based models of theory
reduction (see the entry on
 
reductionism in biology
;
 see also Klein 2009; Dizadji-Bahmani et al. 2010).



For notions of reduction that are connected to explanation, the
different options are, apparently, these:




The notion of reduction is itself an explanatory 
concept
,
in the sense that it is a concept which is to be cashed out in terms
of explanatory concepts: stating that 
a
 reduces to 
b
, one

states
 that 
b
 is explanatorily tied to 
a
.


The reduction relation is an explanatory 
relation
,
despite the fact that the concept is not to be cashed out using
explanatory notions: that 
a
 reduces to 
b
 merely implies that

b
 is explanatorily tied to 
a
.





If the concept of reduction is an explanatory concept, then a
definition of it is either of the form [
… because
…
], or it relevantly involves an analysis of explanatory
notions. If it is not, but still is such that the relation is
explanatory, then a definition would at least imply the truth of a
corresponding explanation.



Given this broad outline, it seems reasonable to assume that most
models of reduction are concerned with explanation in one of these
senses (sometimes also called “epistemological reduction”,
cf. Sarkar 1992). Possible exceptions would include models that
highlight replacement issues, where an apparent phenomenon is not
explained but rather “explained away”, and perhaps some
more technical notions of reduction that are guided neither by
intuitions of the “nothing over and above” sort, nor by
any metaphysical positions such as functionalism (e.g.,
Dizadji-Bahmani et al. 2010; Bickle 2008; Butterfield
2011a&b).


5.3 Reduction, Ground, and Fundamentality



Recently, explanatory connectives, such as ‘because’ and
‘in virtue of’ have attracted considerable attention in
the study of 
metaphysical ground
. Very briefly, the term
‘ground’ is used to articulate dependence claims, without
commitment to specific modal or counterfactual interpretations of
various sorts of metaphysical dependence. Intuitive characterizations
of a necessary condition on reduction which we we alluded to
above—if 
x
 reduces to 
y
, then 
y
 is prior to

x
/then 
y
 is more fundamental than 
x
—suggest that
there may be an interesting link between reduction and ground. The
notion of ground is  characterized in terms of priority, and
closely connected to conceptions of fundamentality. Let us first
provide some background and then hint at possible connections between
reduction and ground.


5.3.1 A very short introduction to ground



Following Schaffer (2009), one can draw a distinction between two
types of metaphysics in terms of their alleged subject matter.

Quinean
 metaphysics deals with existence questions. It asks:
What exists? What is part of the ontology of a given theory, such as
physics? In contrast, 
(Neo-)Aristotelian
 metaphysics is
permissive regarding existence. It is mainly concerned to identify
what is fundamental and what depends on the fundamental. In
Schaffer’s terms, it is concerned with “what grounds
what” (Schaffer 2009). Examples of dependence claims the
Neo-Aristotelian is concerned with include:




The mental depends on the physical.


Mechanisms depend on their constituents and these
constituents’ interactions.


The whole depends on its parts.


Sets depend on their elements.


The hole in the Swiss cheese depends on the cheese.





Until recently, metaphysics did not provide the means to address these
claims properly, says the defender of ground. Consider the claim that
the mental 
depends
 on the physical. Until recently,
metaphysicians would have suggested that this claim is to be cashed
out in modal or counterfactual terms. The claim could be given an
interpretation in terms of supervenience: Any shift in mental
properties necessitates a shift at the level of physical properties.
Any analysis along these lines will leave the grounding theorist
dissatisfied. One reson to be skeptical about an analysis of
dependence in terms of supervenience is that supervenience is neither

irreflexive
 nor 
asymmetric
 (unless by way of
stipulation). In contrast, the sort of dependence grounding theorists
are after when claiming that the mental depends on the physical
requires that the physical does not depend on the mental, neither in
whole nor in part.



The concept of 
ground
 is supposed to do the trick. Ground is
regarded as a primitive (Fine 2001), characterized in terms of
structural features – it is transitive, irreflexive, asymmetric,
and it generates hyper-intensional contexts (Fine 2012; see also the
contributions in Correia and Schnieder 2012). But if this notion is
primitive, how do we get access to it? After all, ‘ground’
is, like ‘reduction’, a philosophical term; reflection on
ordinary usage will not give access to its meaning in philosophical
contexts.



One influential idea is that explanatory connectives such as
‘because’ or ‘in virtue of’ introduce a basic
notion of ground (Fine 2012). ‘Because’ and ‘in
virtue of’ are arguably asymmetric and irreflexive, and they
generate hyper-intensional contexts (Schnieder 2011). They are part of
ordinary discourse, and we are competent in using these expressions.
Construed non-causally, they may give access to ground. Alternatively,
one could give an ostensive definition (Schaffer 2009).



There are two very general reasons to regard reduction as a particular
variant of ground (5.3.2). At the same time, there appears to be a
tension between reduction and ground. Either, reduction turns out to
be distinct from ground, or the structural features of reduction may
shed light on the nature of ground (5.2.3). Third, one may want to
resist an assimilation of reduction to ground, based on a general
skepticism towards the philosophical significance of grounding talk
(5.2.4).


5.3.2 Reduction and ground linked



There are two paths leading from reduction to ground. First, reductive
interpretations of paradigmatic dependence claims may inspire a
reconstruction of reduction in terms of ground. Reductionists about
the mental argue that mental states, like pain, reduce to certain
physiological states and are, hence, identical to the latter.
Eliminativists argue that mental states or properties just do not
exist. Anti-reductionists maintain that pains exist and are different
from corresponding physiological states. Some naturalists employ
various notions of dependence to capture the priority of the natural
while acknowledging a plurality of layers of reality. The debate thus
centered on questions of 
existence
 and, often, various

dependence
 relations, ranging from emergence to ruthless
reduction. It appears, then, that the reductionist about the mental
maintains that the mental 
reductively depends
 on the
physiological.



By these lights, it may seem plausible to reconstruct reduction claims
in terms of ground (if we accept that grounding talk is fruitful).
Above, we have noted that the primitive concept of ground may be
introduced by way of examples, or by lists of paradigmatic dependence
claims. Theories of reduction may offer a viable interpretation of at
least some of these dependence claims. Hence, it should not come as a
surprise that some maintain that redution is sufficient for ground, so
that if 
a
 reduces to 
b
, then 
b
 grounds 
a
 (Rosen 2010,
124f., Schaffer 2009, 378, van Riel 2014). In a similar spirit, one
may suggest that grounding talk offers a fruitful reconstruction of
the idea that some things do not 
exist over and above
 other
things, an idea frequently invoked in the reductio debate (cf. Wilson
2014 for an extensive discussion). It seems that on this conception,
reduction turns out to be a particular variant of grund, perhaps among
others.



Second, conceptions of reduction in the philosophy of science, which
draw on explanatory notions, are committed to the assumption that
there is a tight connection between reduction and ground, conditional
on the assumption that explanatory vocabulary (interpreted
non-causally) does in fact introduce a notion of ground, as some
grounding theorists would have it. A concept of ground is often
introduced by reference to explanatory connectives, such as
‘because’, and ‘in virtue of’. On this
interpretation, there is a close link to conceptions of reduction in
the philosophy of science. Within this strand of the reduction debate,
reduction has been conceived of as an explanatory connection (see
above). Of course, a robust metaphysical interpretation of explanatory
links in terms of ground stands in stark contrast to some standard
conceptions of explanation within the philosophy of science. Realists
have mainly focused on causal explanation (Salmon 1989); only
recently, philosophers of science have turned to non-causal,
mechanistic dependence (cf. Machamer et al. 2000, Craver 2005, 2007).
Others have taken explanation to be primarily an epistemic or
pragmatic affair (Kitcher 1989, Achinstein 1983, van Fraassen 1980).
Nevertheless, it is worth noting that it is an open question whether
(non-causal) explanation can be construed pragmatically or
epistemically, or whether it requires a metaphysically robust
interpretation. If it turns out that explanation does require a
metaphysically robust interpretation, the fact that reduction has been
construed as an explanatory notion in the philosophy of science may be
seen as an indicator that claims of reduction are, properly construed,
claims of ground.



An early defender of the view that reduction involves a kind of
ontological “generative” relation is Enç (1976). He
describes this link as “causation”— most likely in
the traditional sense (a fact which Schaffner (1993) who criticizes
Enç seems to have overklooked).


5.3.3 A possible problem



Yet, there is a problem. Above, it has been pointed out that claims of
reduction are often taken to imply corresponding identity claims.
Recall Identity Reduction (4.5.1):






Identity reduction:
 
P
1
 reduces to 
P
2
 only if 
P
1
=
P
2
.





As a consequence, reduction is taken to have the “structural
features of identity”, such as reflexivity and symmetry, as
Trogdon maintains (Trogdon 2013, similarly: Audi 2012), but also
intensionality. Then, it is not clear how reduction could possibly
exhibit the structural features of ground – irreflexivity,
asymmetry, and hyper-intensionality. (This observation seems to
parallel the tension between supervenience and dependence noted
above.) Philosophers have reacted in different ways. Some take these
observations at face value and conclude that reduction is distinct
from ground (Audi 2012, Trogdon 2013). Others have argued that it
would be short-sighted to construe reduction in this way. From

Identity Reduction
, it simply does not follow that reduction
has the structural features of identity. Recall the puzzle of
reduction discussed above: Although reduction requires identity,
identity is not sufficient for reduction. In fact, if 
a
 reduces to

b
, it follows, by the asymmetry of reduction, that 
b
 does not
reduce to 
a
. For this and similary reasons, it has been suggested
that reduction generates hyper-intensional contexts, and that
reduction statements are sensitive to the modes of presentation
expressed by the terms flanking the reduction predicate (Jenkins 2011,
van Riel 2013, 2014). On this view, reduction may turn out to be a
variant of ground.



Of course, there may be very general reasons to reject grounding talk
altogether (see the discussion in the entry Metaphysical Grounding).
In the present context, one criticism deserves close attention. Wilson
(2014) maintains that reference to a primitive metaphysical relation
in articulations of various dependence claims does not constitute
philosophical progress.


5.3.4 Reductionism and Fundamentality



Finally, it would be interesting to see whether identity-reductionists
are, qua reductionists, committed to the view that there is an
absolutely fundamental level of reality. In the introduction, we have
used a preliminary and partial characterization of reduction,
according to which if 
x
 reduces to 
y
, then 
y
 is more
fundamental than 
x
. Perhaps, by the lights of recent theorizing
about fundamentality, this intuitive notion may turn out to be
fruitful in a characterization of reduction (Fine 2001, Cameron 2008,
Paul 2012, Thako 2018). Schaffer (2003) suggests that fundamentalism
is characterized by a hierarchical picture of nature, the idea that
there is some bottom level in this hierarchy, and by an
“ontological attitude according to which the entities of the
fundamental level are primarily real, while any remaining contingent
entities are at best derivative, if real at all.” (Schaffer
2003, 498) Reductive physicalists seem to accept that only physical
reality is really real, and some of them may endorse the view that
there is a hierarchy, perhaps not in reality, but in nature, or at
least: in how nature appears to us, or how we theorize about nature.
So, they would turn out to be fundamentalists. And reductionists, as
opposed to epiphenomenalist, non-reductive physicalists or
eliminativists, do not deny that things like mental properties are
real, as long as they are reducible, that is: 
identical
 to
fundamental things. Reductionism, in this sense, would then amount to
the view that there is only a fundamental level, and that everything
that is reducible at all reduces to this fundamental level. (For a
general discussion of this concept, see the entry on
 
fundamentality
.)


6. Perspectives on reduction



Scientific reduction became an important topic in the philosophy of
science within the context of a general interest in the unity of
science, and it was inspired by specific cases of what seemed to be
successful reductions. The most prominent argument against
reductionism stems from the observation that straightforward
reductions hardly ever occur. Hence, reductionism cannot be regarded
as yielding a coherent picture of what actually goes on in science. As
long as reductionism is supposed to be more than a purely metaphysical
position and is intended to say something significant about scientific
change or norms, the value and relevance of the notion of reduction
seems to depend in part upon how well the reductionist positions fit
the facts, which their critics argue they do not (see, for example,
Sarkar 1992; Scerri & McIntyre 1997).



Proponents of reduction have responded in different ways. Some have
suggested more flexible and liberal interpretations of reduction
(Wimsatt 1976; Schaffner 1993; Dizadji-Bahmani et al. 2010, Schaffner
2006, 2012, Winther 2009), to ensure that the term
‘reduction’ still serves a purpose in describing actual
scientific practice. Bickle has recently suggested that philosophical
theorizing about reduction should best be construed as reconstructing
whatever cases scientists judge to be reductions (Bickle 2008). Some
form of orientation towards actual scientific practice can be found in
perhaps the majority of recent publications on the topic of reduction.
Batterman (2014) proposed a challenge to particular reductivist
interpretations of inter-theory relations in physics, arguing that
naive conceptions of reduction and emergence fail to do justice to the
details of bridging micro- and macro-scales. Carl Gillett (2016) has
explicitly argued that the reduction debate suffers from the defect
that it does not pay close attention to explanations offered in the
sciences, and he reconstructs a general reduction-emergence framework
from explanations given in the sciences. Palacios (2023), developing
an idea suggested by Torretti (1990), focuses on the different
epistemic and ontological functions paradigmatic cases of reductions
in physics seem to play, including, amongst others, not only
explanation, but also justification, acceptance, and correction. She
then distinguishes models of reduction in terms of how they capture
these functions and suggests a pluralist view. In her (2022), she
argues that by the lights of these models, some reductions in physics
turn out to be compatible with emergence (if interpreted
appropriately).



It is difficult to assess the exact relation between these discussions
and traditional, generalist philosophical discussions of reduction and
emergence. Although questions of a proper theory of
topic-identification transcend the boundaries of this entry, it seems
plausible to assume that debates driven at least partly by the goal to
adequately model scientific practice are not primarily concerned with
traditional questions of scientific or ontological unification, or the
relation between phenomenal qualities and physiological goings-on in
the human brain or body. The difference in perspective is paralleled
by the ways in which definitions or explications of reduction are
treated. Whereas Kim (1998) argues that Nagel’s characterization
of reduction does not capture 
reduction
, properly construed,
philosophers of science often take Nagel’s definition at face
value, as a stipulation, which can then be employed to identify
interesting actual inter-theory relations. Nagel himself offered his
model as an explication of some general idea oriented towards a set of
candidate explanations ranging from the explanation of headaches to
explanatory inter-theory relations in physics. He couched it in terms
of the instrumentalism he endorsed on independent grounds. Today, the
model has taken up a life of its own. Although the various reduction
debates are clearly related, it is sometimes difficult to assess
whether people talk about the same thing when employing the term
‘reduction’.






Bibliography




Achinstein, T.A., 1983, 
The Nature of Explanation
, New
York: Oxford University Press.


Ager, T.A., J.L. Aronson, & R. Weingard, 1974, “Are
Bridge Laws Really Necessary?”, 
Noûs
, 8(2):
119–134.


Audi, P., 2012, “A Clarification and Defense of the Notion
of Grounding”, in F. Correia & B. Schnieder (eds.),

Metaphysical Grounding: Understanding the Structure of
Reality
, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp.
101–121.


Balzer, W., 1984, “On the Comparison of Classical and
Special Relativistic Space-Time”, in W. Balzer, D.A. Pearce,
& H.J. Schmidt (eds.), 
Reduction in Science: Structure,
Examples, Philosophical Problems
, Dordrecht: D. Reidel, pp.
331–357.


Bechtel, W., 1994, “Levels of descriptions and explanation
in cognitive science”, 
Minds and Machines
, 4:
1–25.


–––, 2007, “Reducing psychology while
maintaining its autonomy via mechanistic explanation”, in M.
Schouten & H. Looren de Jong (eds.), 
The Matter of the Mind:
Philosophical Essays on Psychology, Neuroscience and Reduction
,
Oxford: Basil Blackwell.


Bechtel, W. & A. Abrahamsen, 2005, “Explanation: A
Mechanistic Alternative”, 
Studies in History and Philosophy
of the Biological and Biomedical Sciences
, 36:
421–441.


Bechtel, W. & R. Richardson, 1993, “Emergent phenomena
and complex systems”, in J. Kim, A. Beckermann, & H. Flohr
(eds.), 
Emergence or Reduction? Essays on the prospects of
nonreductive physicalism
, Berlin: de Gruyter, pp.
257–288.


Beckermann, A., 2009, “What is Property Physicalism?”,
in S. Walter, B.P. McLaughlin, & A. Beckermann (eds.), 
The
Oxford Handbook of Philosophy of Mind
, Oxford: Oxford University
Press, pp. 152–172.


Bickle, J., 1992, “Mental Anomaly and the New Mind-Brain
Reductionism”, 
Philosophy of Science
, 59:
217–230.


–––, 1998, 
Psychoneural Reduction: The New
Wave
, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.


–––, 2003, 
Philosophy and Neuroscience: A
Ruthlessly Reductive Account
, Dordrecht: Kluwer.


–––, 2008, “Real Reduction in Real
Neuroscience: Metascience, Not Philosophy of Science (and Certainly
Not Metaphysics!)”, in J. Hohwy & J. Kallestrup (eds.),

Being Reduced
, Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp.
34–51.


Berkeley, G., 1948–1957, 
The Works of George Berkeley,
Bishop of Cloyne
, 9 volumes, A.A. Luce & T.E. Jessop (eds.),
London: Thomas Nelson and Sons.


Block, N., forthcoming, “Functional Reduction”, in M.
Sabatés, D. Sosa, & T. Horgan (eds.), 
Supervenience in
Mind: A Festschrift for Jaegwon Kim
, Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.


Block, N. & R. Stalnaker, 1999, “Conceptual Analysis,
Dualism, and the Explanatory Gap”, 
Philosophical
Review
, 108: 1–46.


Brigandt, I. & A. Love, 2012, “Reductionism in
Biology”, 
The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy

(Summer 2012 Edition), E. N. Zalta (ed.),
 URL=<
https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/sum2012/entries/reduction-biology/
>.


Butterfield, J., 2011a, “Emergence, Reduction and
Supervenience: A Varied Landscape”, 
Foundations of
Physics
, 41: 920–959.


–––, 2011b, “Less is Different: Emergence
and Reduction Reconciled”, 
Foundations of Physics
, 41:
1065–1135.


Cameron, R. P., 2008, “Turtles All the Way Down: Regress,
Priority and Fundamentality”, 
Philosophical Quarterly
,
58(230): 1–14. doi:10.1111/j.1467-9213.2007.509.x


Carnap, R., 1934, 
The Unity of Science
, London: Kegan
Paul, Trench, Trubner, and Co.


–––, 1938 [1991], “Logical Foundations of
the Unity of Science”, in 
International Encyclopaedia of
Unified Science
 (Volumes I), Chicago: University of Chicago
Press; reprinted in R. Boyd, Ph. Gasper and J.D. Trout (eds.), 
The
Philosophy of Science
, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press,
393–404.


Cartwright, N., 1999, 
The Dappled World: A Study of the
Boundaries of Science
, Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.


Causey, R., 1972a, “Attribute Identities in
Microreductions”, 
Journal of Philosophy
, 64:
407–422.


–––, 1972b, “Uniform
Microreductions”, 
Synthese
, 25: 176–218.


–––, 1974, “Unified Theories and Unified
Science”, in R.S. Cohen et al. (eds.), 
PSA 1974
,
Dordrecht: D. Reidel Publishing Co., 1976, pp. 3–13.


–––, 1977, 
Unity of Science
, Dordrecht,
NL: Reidel.


Chalmers, D., 1996, 
The Conscious Mind
, Oxford: Oxford
University Press.


–––, 2020, “Idealism and the Mind-Body
Problem”, 
The Routledge Handbook of Panpsychism
,
William Seager (ed.), New York: Routledge, 353–73.


Churchland, Patricia, 1986, 
Neurophilosophy
, Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.


Churchland, Paul M., 1979, 
Scientific Realism and the
Plasticity of Mind
, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.


–––, 1981, “Eliminative Materialism and
the Propositional Attitudes”, 
The Journal of
Philosophy
, 78: 67–90.


–––, 1985, “Reduction, Qualia and the
Direct Introspection of Brain States”, 
Journal of
Philosophy
, 82: 8–28.


Clapp, L., 2001, “Disjunctive properties and multiple
realizations”, 
The Journal of Philosophy
, 98:
111–136.


Correia, F., 2008, “Ontological Dependence”,

Philosophy Compass
, 3(5): 1013–1032,


Correia, F. & Schnieder, B. (eds.) 2012, 
Metaphysical
Grounding: Understanding the Structure of Reality
, Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.


Craver, C., 2005, “Beyond Reduction: Mechanisms, Multifield
Integration and the Unity of Neuroscience”, 
Studies in the
History and Philosophy of Biological and Biomedical Sciences
, 36:
373–395.


–––, 2007, 
Explaining the Brain: Mechanisms
and the Mosaic Unity of Neuroscience
, Oxford: Oxford University
Press/Clarendon Press.


Cummins, R., 1975, “Functional analysis”, 
Journal
of Philosophy
, 72: 741–765.


–––, 1983, 
The nature of psychological
explanation
, Cambridge, MA: Bradford/MIT Press.


–––, 2000, “‘How Does It
Work?’ versus ‘What Are the Laws?’: Two Conceptions
of Psychological Explanation”, in F. Keil & R. Wilson
(eds.), 
Explanation and Cognition
, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press,
pp. 117–144.


Darden, L. & N. Maull, 1977, “Interfield
Theories”, 
Philosophy of Science
, 44: 43–64.


Dizadji-Bahmani, F., R. Frigg, & S. Hartmann, 2010, “Who
is Afraid of Nagelian Reduction?”, 
Erkenntnis
 73(3):
393–412.


Dupré, J., 1993, 
The Disorder of Things. Metaphysical
Foundations of the Disunity of Science
, Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.


Enç, B., 1976, “Identity Statements and
Microreductions”, 
Journal of Philosophy
, 73:
285–306.


Endicott, R., 1998, “Collapse of the New Wave”,

The Journal of Philosophy
, 95: 53–72.


–––, 2001, “Post-Structuralist Angst
– Critical Notice: John Bickle, Psychoneural Reduction: The New
Wave”, 
Philosophy of Science
, 68: 377–393.


–––, 2022, “Functionalism with a third
step: a larger and less reductive picture”,

ProtoSociology
, 39: 89–106.


Esfeld, M.A. & C. Sachse, 2007, “Theory reduction by
means of functional sub-types”, 
International Studies in the
Philosophy of Sciences
, 21: 1–17.


–––, 2011, 
Conservative Reductionism
,
London: Routledge.


Fazekas, P., 2009, “Reconsidering the Role of Bridge-Laws in
Intertheoretical Reductions”, 
Erkenntnis
, 71:
303–22.


Feigl, H., 1967, 
The “Mental” and the
“Physical”. The Essay and a Postscript
, Minneapolis:
University of Minnesota Press.


Feyerabend, P.K., 1962, “Explanation, Reduction, and
Empiricism”, in G. Maxwell & H. Feigl (eds.), 
Scientific
Explanation, Space and Time
 (Minnesota Studies in the Philosophy
of Science: Volume III), Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press,
pp. 28–97.
 [
Feyerabend 1962 available online
]


–––, 1966, “The Structure of
Science”, Review of 
The Structure of Science
, by Ernest
Nagel. 
British Journal for the Philosophy of Science
, 17:
237–49.


Fine, K., 2001, “The Question of Realism”,

Philosopher’s Imprint
, 1: 1–30.


–––, 2012 “The Pure Logic of
Ground”, 
Review of Symbolic Logic
, 5: 1–25.


Fodor, J.A., 1974, “Special Sciences: Or the Disunity of
Science as a Working Hypothesis”, 
Synthese
, 28:
97–115.


–––, 1981, 
Representations: Philosophical
Essays on the Foundations of Cognitive Science
, Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.


–––, 1997, “Special Sciences: Still
Autonomous After All These Years”, 
Philosophical
Perspectives
 (Volume 11: Mind, Causation, and World),

Noûs
 (Supplement): 31: 149–163.


Friedman, K., 1982, “Is Intertheoretic Reduction
Feasible?”, 
The British Journal for the Philosophy of
Science
, 33: 17–40.


Gillett, C., 2016, 
Reduction and Emergence in Philosophy and
Science
, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.


Glennan, S., 1996, “Mechanisms and the Nature of
Causation”, 
Erkenntnis
, 44: 49–71.


Hempel, C.G. & P. Oppenheim, 1948, “Studies in the Logic
of Explanation”, 
Philosophy of Science
, 15:
135–175.


Hoering, W., 1984, “Anomalies of reduction”, in W.
Balzer, D.A. Pearce, & H.J. Schmidt (eds.), 
Reduction in
Science. Structure, Examples, Philosophical Problems
, Dordrecht:
D. Reidel, pp. 33–50.


Hooker, C., 1981, “Towards a General Theory of Reduction.
Part I: Historical and Scientific Setting. Part II: Identity in
Reduction. Part III: Cross-Categorial Reduction”,

Dialogue
, 20: 38–59, 201–236, 496–529.


Hoynigen-Huene, P., 1989, “Epistemological Reductionism in
Biology: Intuitions, Explications, and Objections”, in F.
Wuketits & P. Hoyningen-Huene (eds.), 
Reductionism and Systems
Theory in the Life Sciences: Some Problems and Perspectives
,
Dordrecht: Kluwer, pp. 29– 44.


Hull, D.L., 1976, “Informal Aspects of Theory
Reduction”, in R.S. Cohen & A. Michalos (eds.), 
PSA
1974: Proceedings of the Biennial Meeting of the Philosophy of Science
Association
, Dordrecht: D. Reidel, pp. 653–70.


Jackson, F., 2005, “The Case for a Priori
Physicalism”, in A. Beckermann & Ch. Nimtz (eds.),

Philosophy—Science—Scientific Philosophy, Main
Lectures and Colloquia of GAP 5, Fifth International Congress of the
Society for Analytical Philosophy
, Frankfurt/M: mentis, pp.
251–265.


Jackson, F., R. Pargetter, & E. Prior, 1982,
“Functionalism and type-type identity theories”,

Philosophical Studies
, 42: 209–225.


Jenkins, C.S., 2011: “Is Metaphysical Dependence
Irreflexive?” 
The Monist
, 94: 267–276.


Kauffman, S.A., 1970, “Articulation of parts explanation in
biology and the rational search for them”, in 
PSA:
Proceedings of the Biennial Meeting of the Philosophy of Science
Association
, 1970: 257–272.


Kemeny, J.G. & P. Oppenheim, 1956, “On Reduction”,

Philosophical Studies
, 7: 6–19.


Kim, J., 1982, “Psychophysical Supervenience”,

Philosophical Studies
, 41: 51–70.


–––, 1990, “Supervenience as a
Philosophical Concept”, 
Metaphilosophy
, 21: 1–27;
reprinted in Kim 1993: 131–160.


–––, 1992, “Multiple Realization and the
Metaphysics of Reduction”, 
Philosophy and Phenomenological
Research
, 52: 1–26.


–––, 1993, 
Supervenience and Mind. Selected
Philosophical Essays
, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.


–––, 1998, 
Mind in a Physical World. An
Essay on the Mind-Body Problem and Mental Causation
, Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press.


–––, 2008, “Reduction and Reductive
Explanation. Is One Possible Without the Other?”, in J.
Kallestrup & J. Hohwy (eds.), 
Being Reduced. New Essays on
Reduction, Explanation and Causation
, Oxford: Oxford University
Press, pp. 93–114.


Kitcher, P., 1989, “Explanatory Unification and the Causal
Structure of the World”, in: P. Kitcher and W. Salmon (eds.),

Scientific Explanation
, Minneapolis: University of Minnesota
Press, pp. 410–505.


Klein, C., 2009, “Reduction without Reductionism: A Defence
of Nagel on Connectability”, 
Philosophical Quarterly
,
59: 39–53.


Lachs, J. 1972, “Fichte’s Idealism”,

American Philosophical Quarterly
, 9(4); 311-318.


Levine, J., 1993, “On Leaving Out What It’s
Like”, in G. Humphreys & M. Davies (eds.),

Consciousness: Psychological and Philosophical Essays
,
Oxford, UK: Blackwell, pp. 121–136.


–––, 1998, “Conceivability and the
Metaphysics of Mind”, 
Noûs
, 32:
449–480.


Lewis, D., 1969, “Review of Art, Mind, and Religion”,

The Journal of Philosophy
, 66: 23–35.


–––, 1972, “Psychophysical and Theoretical
Identifications”, 
Australasian Journal of Philosophy
,
3: 249–258.


Loar, B., 1981, 
Mind and Meaning
, Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.


Lycan, W., 1987, 
Consciousness
, Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.


Machamer, P., L. Darden, & C.F. Craver, 2000, “Thinking
about Mechanisms”, 
Philosophy of Science
, 67:
1–25.


Marras, A., 2005, “Consciousness and Reduction”,

The British Journal for the Philosophy of Science
, 56:
335–361.


McCauley, R., 1981, “Hypothetical Identities and Ontological
Economizing: Comments on Causey’s program for the Unity of
Science”, 
Philosophy of Science
, 48:
218–227.


Melnyk, A., 2003, 
A Physicalist Manifesto: Thoroughly Modern
Materialism
, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.


Moulines, C.U., 1984, “Ontological Reduction in the Natural
Sciences”, in W. Balzer, D.A. Pearce, & H.J. Schmidt (eds.),

Reduction in Science: Structure, Examples, Philosophical
Problems
, Dordrecht: D. Reidel, pp. 51–70.


Mulligan, K., 2006, “Ascent, Propositions and other Formal
Objects”, 
Grazer Philosophische Studien
, 72:
29–48.


Nagel, E., 1935, “The Logic of Reduction in the
Sciences”, 
Erkenntnis
, 5: 46–52.


–––, 1949, “The Meaning of Reduction in
the Natural Sciences”, in R.C. Stouffer (ed.), 
Science and
Civilization
, Madison: University of Wisconsin Press, pp.
99–135.


–––, 1961, 
The Structure of Science.
Problems in the Logic of Explanation
, New York: Harcourt, Brace
& World, Inc.


–––, 1970, “Issues in the Logic of
Reductive Explanations”, in H.E. Kiefer & K.M. Munitz
(eds.), 
Mind, Science, and History
, Albany, NY: SUNY Press,
pp. 117–137.


Neurath, O., 1931, “Physicalism: The Philosophy of the
Vienna Circle”, 
The Monist
, 41: 618–623.
Reprinted in R.S. Cohen, & M. Neurath (eds.), 
Philosophical
Papers 1913–1946
, Dordrecht: D. Reidel Publishing Company,
1983, pp. 48–51.


Oppenheim, P. & H. Putnam, 1958, “The Unity of Science
as a Working Hypothesis”, in G. Maxwell, H. Feigl, & M.
Scriven (eds.), 
Concepts, theories, and the mind-body
problem
, Minneapolis: Minnesota University Press, pp.
3–36.


Palacios, P., 2023: “Intertheoretic Reduction beyond the
Nagelian model”, in C. Soto (ed.), 
Current Debates in
Philosophy of Science: In Honor of Roberto Torretti
, Cham:
Springer.


–––, 2022, 
Emergence and Reduction in
Physics
, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.


Paul, L.A., 2012, “Building the World From its Fundamental
Constituents”, 
Philosophical Studies
, 158(2):
221–256. doi:10.1007/s11098-012-9885-8.


Place, U., 1956: “Is Consciousness a Brain Process”,

British Journal of Psychology
, 47: 44–50.


Putnam, H., 1965, “How Not to Talk about Meaning,” in

Boston Studies in the Philosophy of Science
, vol. 2, 
In
Honor of Philip Frank: Proceedings of the Boston Colloquium for the
Philosophy of Science
, 1962–1964, R.S. Cohen & M.W.
Wartofsky (eds), New York: Humanities Press, pp. 205–22.


–––, 1967, “Psychological
Predicates”, in D.D. Merrill & W.H. Capitan (eds.), 
Art,
Mind, and Religion
, Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press,
pp. 37–48.


–––, 1970, “On properties”, in
Nicholas Rescher et al. (ed.), 
Essays in Honor of Carl G.
Hempel
, Dordrecht: D. Reidel; reprinted in Hilary Putnam,

Philosophical Papers
 (Volume 1), Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.


–––, 1978, 
Meaning and the Moral
Sciences
, London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.


Richardson, R.C., 1979, “Functionalism and
Reductionism”, 
Philosophy of Science
, 45:
533–558.


Rosaler, J., 2019, “Reduction as an a posteriori
relation”, 
The British Journal for the Philosophy of
Science
, 70(1): 269–299.


Rosen, G., 2010, “Metaphysical Dependence: Grounding and
Reduction”, in B. Hale & A. Hoffman (eds.), 
Modality:
Metaphysics, Logic, and Epistemology
, Oxford: Oxford University
Press, pp. 109–136.


Rosenberg, A., 2006, 
Darwinian reductionism: or, how to stop
worrying and love molecular biology
, Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.


Sachse, C., 2007, 
Reductionism in the philosophy of
science
, Frankfurt/M: Ontos-Verlag.


Salmon, W., 1989, 
Four Decades of Explanation
,
Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.


Sarkar, S., 1992, “Models of Reduction and Categories of
Reductionism”, 
Synthese
, 91: 167–194.


–––, 2015 “Nagel on Reduction”,

Studies in the History and Philosophy of Science
 (Part A),
53: 43–56.


Scerri, E. & L. McIntyre, 1997, “The Case for the
Philosophy of Chemistry”, 
Synthese
 111:
213–232.


Schaffer, J., 2003, “Is There a Fundamental Level?”

Noûs
, 37(3): 498–517.
doi:10.1111/1468-0068.00448


–––, 2009, “On What Grounds What”,
in D. Manley, D. Chalmers & R. Wasserman (eds.),

Metametaphysics: New Essays on the Foundations of Ontology
,
Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 347–383.


–––, 2012,“Grounding, Transitivity and
Contrastivity”, in F. Correia & B. Schnieder (eds.),

Metaphysical Grounding: Understanding the Structure of
Reality
, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp.
122–138.


Schaffner, K., 1967, “Approaches to Reduction”,

Philosophy of Science
, 34: 137–147.


–––, 1993, 
Discovery and Explanation in
Biology and Medicine
, Chicago: The University of Chicago
Press.


–––, 2006, “Reduction: the Cheshire Cat
Problem and a Return to Roots”, 
Synthese
, 151:
377–402.


–––, 2012, “Ernest Nagel and
Reduction”, 
Journal of Philosophy
, CIX:
534–565.


Scheibe, E., 1999, 
Die Reduktion Physikalischer Theorien:
Inkommensurabilität und Grenzfallreduktion (vol.II)
,
Berlin/Heidelberg/New York: Springer.


Schnieder, B., 2011, “A Logic for
‘Because’”, 
Review of Symbolic Logic
, 4:
445–465.


Shoemaker, S., 2007, 
Physical Realization
, Oxford: Oxford
University Press.


–––, 2002, “Reduction, Emergence, and
Explanation”, in M. Silberstein & P. Machamer (eds.),

The Blackwell Guide to the Philosophy of Science
, Oxford:
Blackwell, pp. 80–107.


Sklar, L., 1967, “Types of inter-theoretic reduction”,

British Journal for Philosophy of Science
, 5:
464–482.


Smart, J., 1959, “Sensations and Brain Processes”,

Philosophical Review
, 68: 141–156.


–––, 1963, “Materialism”,

Journal of Philosophy
, 60: 651–662.


Sneed, J., 1971, 
The Logical Structure of Mathematical
Physics
, Dordrecht: D. Reidel.


Sober, E., 1990, “Putting the Function Back Into
Functionalism”, in G. Lycan (ed.), 
Mind and Cognition: A
Reader
, Oxford: Blackwell, pp. 97–106.


Stegmüller, W., 1979, 
The Structuralist View of Theories.
A Possible Analogue of the Bourbaki Programme in Physical
Science
, Berlin/Heidelberg/New York: Springer.


–––, 1986, 
Theorie und Erfahrung: Dritter
Teilband. Die Entwicklung des neueren Strukturalismus seit 1973
,
Vol. 3, Berlin/Heidelberg/New York: Springer.


Suppes, P., 1967, “What is a scientific theory”, in S.
Morgenbesser (ed.), 
Philosophy of Science today
, New York:
Basic Books, pp. 55–67.


Tahko, T., 2018, “Fundamentality and Ontological
Minimality”, in Bliss & Priest 2018b: 237–253


Torretti, R., 1990, 
Creative Understanding
, Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.


Trogdon, K., 2013, “An Introduction to Grounding”, in
M. Hoeltje, B. Schnieder & A. Steinberg (eds.), 
Varieties of
Dependence: Ontological Dependence, Grounding, Supervenience,
Response-Dependence
, Munich: Philosophia Verlag, pp.
97–122.


van Fraassen, B., 1980, 
The Scientific Image
, Oxford:
Oxford University Press.


Van Gulick, R., 1980, “Functionalism, information and
content”, 
Nature and System
, 2: 139–62. Reprinted
in W. Lycan (ed.), 
Mind and Cognition
, Oxford: Basil
Blackwell, 1990: 107–129. Reprinted in J. Bermudez & F.
McPherson (eds.), 
Philosophical Psychology: Contemporary
Readings
, London: Routledge, 2006.


–––, 1992, “Nonreductive Materialism and
the Nature of Intertheoretical Constraint”, in A. Beckermann, H.
Flohr, & J. Kim (eds.), 
Emergence or Reduction? Essays on the
Prospects of Non-Reductive Physicalism
, Berlin: de Gruyter, pp.
157–179.


–––, 1999, “Conceiving beyond our means:
the limits of thought experiments”, in S. Hameroff, A. Kazniak,
and D. Chalmers (eds), 
Toward a Science of Consciousness III
,
Cambridge MA: MIT Press.


–––, 2001, “Reduction, Emergence and Other
Recent Options on the Mind/Body Problem: A Philosophic
Overview”, 
Journal of Consciousness Studies
, 8:
1–34.


–––, 2010, “Non-Reductive Physicalism and
the Theleo-Pragmatic Theory of Mind”, 
Philosophia
Naturalis
, 47–48(1–2): 103–124.


van Riel, R., 2010, “Identity-Based Reduction and Reductive
Explanation”, 
Philosophia Naturalis
,
47–48(1–2): 183–219.


–––, 2011, “Nagelian Reduction Beyond the
Nagel-Model”, 
Philosophy of Science
, 78(3):
353–375.


–––, 2013, “Identity, Asymmetry, and the
Relevance of Meanings for Models of Reduction”, 
The British
Journal for the Philosophy of Science
, 64(4): 747–761
doi:10.1093/bjps/axs028


–––, 2014, 
The Concept of Reduction
,
Dordrecht: Springer.


Walter, S., 2006, “Multiple Realizability and Reduction: A
Defense of the Disjunctive Move”, 
Metaphysica
, 9:
43–65.


Wilson, J., 2014, “No Work for a Theory of Grounding”,

Inquiry: An Interdisciplinary Journal of Philosophy
, 57:
535–579.


Wimsatt, W., 1972, “Complexity and Organization”, in
K.F. Schaffner & R.S. Cohen (eds.), 
PSA 1972: Proceedings of
the Biennial Meeting of the Philosophy of Science Association
,
Dordrecht: Reidel, pp. 67–86.


–––, 1976, “Reductive Explanation: A
Functional Account”, in G. Pearce, A.C. Michalos, C.A. Hooker,
& R.S. Cohen (eds.), 
PSA: Proceedings of the Biennial Meeting
of the Philosophy of Science Association
, 1974:
671–710.


–––, 1994, “The Ontology of Complex
Systems: Levels of Organization, Perspectives and Causal
Thickets”, 
Canadian Journal of Philosophy

(Supplementary Volume), 20: 207–274.


Winther, R.G., 2009, “Schaffner’s Model of Theory
Reduction: Critique and Reconstruction”, 
Philosophy of
Science
, 76: 119–142.


Yablo, S., 1999, “Concepts and consciousness”,

Philosophy and Phenomenological Research
, 59:
455–464.








Academic Tools










How to cite this entry
.








Preview the PDF version of this entry
 at the
 
Friends of the SEP Society
.








Look up topics and thinkers related to this entry

 at the Internet Philosophy Ontology Project (InPhO).








Enhanced bibliography for this entry

at 
PhilPapers
, with links to its database.












Other Internet Resources




Papers on Reduction at Philpapers
.


Brains: a group blog on topics in the philosophy and science of mind
,
 hosted by Gualtiero Piccinini and John Schwenkler.


Search Results for “Reduction” at the PhilSci Archive
.








Related Entries




dualism
 |
 
functionalism
 |
 
mind/brain identity theory
 |
 
multiple realizability
 |
 
physics: intertheory relations in
 |
 
reduction, scientific: in biology
 |
 
scientific explanation
 |
 
supervenience














 






Copyright © 2024
 by




Raphael van Riel

<
vanriel
@
gmx
.
de
>


Robert Van Gulick

<
rnvangul
@
syr
.
edu
>
    




 









  Open access to the SEP is made possible by a world-wide funding initiative.

  Please Read How You Can Help Support the Growth and Development of the Encyclopedia




 

