











 
 Entry Navigation 






Entry Contents


Bibliography


Academic Tools


Friends PDF Preview 


Author and Citation Info 
 


Back to Top 


























Social Ontology
First published Wed Mar 21, 2018; substantive revision Mon Mar 4, 2024





Social ontology is the study of the nature and properties of the
social world. It is concerned with analyzing things in the world that
arise from social interaction, and with explaining what makes them the
things they are—that is, how the social world is
“constructed.”



The field brings together a wide range of social entities and
phenomena. For instance:




Money:
 There is a lot of interest today in new forms of
money, like cryptocurrencies. But what is money in the first place?
Are cryptocurrencies money, and can they be?


Sex and gender:
 What is the nature of sex? What is the
nature of gender? Is there a gender binary, or is that a mistake? Is
gender biological, or is it socially constructed, or is it an
illusion? What does it mean to say that gender is socially
constructed?


Social groups and group cognition:
 what are groups, and
can they do things in the world? Does it make sense to speak of a
social group having a thought, or taking action, or intending to do
something? Can groups have beliefs? Can they have feelings, or
emotions? Do they bear responsibility for things they do?





Still more entities investigated in social ontology also include

language, norms, family and marriage, disability, law,
corporations, art
, and 
artifacts
.
 
Sections 5.1–5.8

 of this entry discuss work in social ontology in many of these
specific domains. It is difficult to delineate a precise scope for the
field (see
 
section 2.1
).
 In general, though, the entities explored in social ontology largely
overlap with those that social scientists work on, and a good deal of
work in social ontology takes place within the social sciences.



Social ontology, as a field, is built on the idea that these questions
are not just interesting on their own, but may inform one another.
Perhaps we can learn about the nature of race by investigating the
nature of gender, or vice versa; perhaps we can learn about the nature
of money by investigating the nature of law, or by investigating the
nature of tools and artifacts we invent. Social ontology brings
together inquiries like these, to address more general questions about
the nature of the social world as well.



In considering both particular and general topics in social ontology,
it is helpful to break the inquiry up into two parts. Consider gender,
for instance. One inquiry involves the “construction” or
“set-up” of gender-categories: are they socially
constructed, and if so, what does the work of constructing them? Is it
social practices, attitudes we have, biological regularities, or
something else, that 
set up
 or 
anchor

gender-categories to be what they are? A related but somewhat separate
inquiry involves the “products” of the construction, i.e.,
the characteristics or constituents of the gender-category,
constructed as it is. To belong to a given gender-category, is it a
matter of having certain physical characteristics, or of being treated
in a certain way, or of having certain beliefs, or of others’
having certain beliefs? We can ask similar questions about many (if
not all) social entities. One might inquire about what sets up or
constructs a legal category, and also inquire about the “real
definition” of the category that has been constructed. Similarly
for race, money, and even social groups. A close (though imperfect)
analogy is with the inquiry into the semantics of a word (i.e., its
meaning or definition) versus the inquiry into its meta-semantics
(i.e., what makes it have the meaning it does). Inquiring into the
construction of social entities is like meta-semantics, i.e., what
sets it up to have the real definition it does. And inquiring into the
“product” or “constituents of a social entity”
is like semantics, i.e., what the entity’s resulting real
definition is.



This entry discusses theories and approaches to each of these
divisions separately:




Theories of the constituents, or membership conditions, of social
things in general. For instance, some theories argue that social
entities are built out of the psychological states of individual
people, while others argue that they are built out of actions, and yet
others that they are built out of practices. Still other theories deny
that a distinction can even be made between the social and the
non-social. This is the topic of
 
section 3.


Theories of how social categories are constructed or set up (or
“anchored”) in general. Are social categories and kinds
produced by our attitudes? By our language? Are they produced by
causal patterns? And is there just one way social categories are set
up, or are there many varieties of social construction? This is the
topic of
 
section 4.





The term ‘social ontology’ has only come into wide
currency in recent years, but the nature of the social has been a
topic of inquiry since ancient Greece. As a whole, the field can be
understood as a branch of metaphysics, the general inquiry into the
nature of entities.








1. History




1.1 Ancient and Early Modern Debates on the Sources of Social Entities


1.2 Individuals, Aggregates, and Wholes


1.3 The Construction of Social Categories






2. The Problem of Demarcating Social Ontology




2.1 Social Versus Non-Social


2.2 What is Meant by the “Building” of the Social World




2.2.1 The inquiry into the ontological determination of the social


2.2.2 The inquiry into how the social is constructed






2.3 Ontology Versus Causation


2.4 Realism and Anti-Realism Regarding the Social






3. Constituents of Social Entities




3.1 Ontological Individualism




3.1.1 Psychologism


3.1.2 Atomism


3.1.3 Bodies, actions, and relations






3.2 Material Building Blocks, In Addition to Individuals




3.2.1 Resources


3.2.2 Physicalism






3.3 Partial or mixed theories




3.3.1 Externalist psychologism


3.3.2 Institutional individualism






3.4 Socially Constituted Building Blocks




3.4.1 Socially constituted individuals


3.4.2 Practices and embodied agency






3.5 Top-Down and Flat Approaches




3.5.1 Ontological priority of the social


3.5.2 Flat ontologies










4. How Social Categories and Kinds Are Constructed




4.1 Social Categories as a Product of Each Person’s Own Mental States


4.2 Social Categories as a Product of Community-Wide Mental States




4.2.1 Social categories set up by agreement


4.2.2 Social convention


4.2.3 Collective attitudes and dispositions


4.2.4 Other mental states






4.3 Pattern Theories




4.3.1 Functional roles and realizers


4.3.2 Teleofunctions and tokens


4.3.3 Causal loops






4.4 Theories of Practice


4.5 Pluralistic and Heterogeneous Theories


4.6 The Roles of Language




4.6.1 Social categories as word meanings


4.6.2 Social categories set up by speech acts, discourse, features of language










5. Key Domains Addressed by Social Ontology




5.1 Social Groups


5.2 Group Minds, Collective Intentionality, and Group Agency


5.3 Institutions, Organizations, and Firms


5.4 Race, Gender, and Disability


5.5 Artifacts and Artworks


5.6 Money


5.7 The Law


5.8 Language and Linguistic Objects






Bibliography


Academic Tools


Other Internet Resources


Related Entries










1. History



The following brief overview mentions some key themes and innovations
in the history of social ontology. For a more detailed discussion of
historical developments in social ontology as well as references, see
the supplementary document:
 
Social ontology: History
.
 For a historical treatment from the perspective of language, see
Aarsleff 1982; from the perspective of psychology, see Lock and Strong
2010.


1.1 Ancient and Early Modern Debates on the Sources of Social Entities



Ancient inquiries into the nature of social phenomena introduced
questions that remain active today: Which features of the world are
products of humans or society, and which are products of nature? What
does it mean to say that something is a social creation? A central
concern of Sophism, a school of Greek philosophy in the fifth century
BCE, was the contrast between nature (
phusis
) and custom,
law, habit, or convention (
nomos
). In particular, they
debated the sources of justice, law, and language: are these rooted in

phusis
 or in 
nomos
?



Ancient philosophers explored the mix between natural and human
contributions in the construction of familiar features of the world.
They did not, however, theorize much about exactly 
what

people do in order to create the social world. Instead, they wrote of
agreements, compacts, conventions, habits, laws, customs, and so on,
without paying particular notice to separating these from one another.
In the early modern period, theories of these sources broadened
considerably, as did the variety of social phenomena being
investigated. Approaches developed in the seventeenth and eighteenth
centuries include:








Social entities as products of covenants
: Hobbes, in

Leviathan
 (1651), argues that a stable commonwealth is
generated by covenants among all the people in a society.
Hobbes’s analysis is reflexive: the people who institute the
commonwealth are those who are members of the commonwealth. Hobbes
analyzes covenants in terms of agreements, and also provides an
analysis of agreement, a crucial part of which is to explain what
makes agreements binding.
 






Social entities as products of convention
: As an alternative
to ‘compact’ or ‘agreement,’ the legal
theorist Samuel Pufendorf, in 
De Officio Hominis et Civis

(1673), uses the term ‘convention’ as the basis for law
and language. He argues that conventions do not need to be explicitly
formed or agreed to. Instead, we can have 
tacit

conventions—i.e., conventions that we may not even be aware we
have. Hume greatly advances the analysis of convention and of social
phenomena in terms of it (Hume 1740). He expands the scope of
convention to include a wide variety of social entities—not only
law, property, and language, but also money, government, justice, and
promises.
 






Social entities as products of God and Nature
: Other early
modern philosophers root the social world in the natural—both in
divine commandment and in human nature. Robert Filmer, a seventeenth
century monarchist, argues in 
Patriarcha
 (1680) that the
state is a family. This implies, according to Filmer, that state
authority is no different from the authority of a father over his
family. Locke’s 
Two Treatises on Government
 (1689)
sharply criticize Filmer and provide a competing analysis, though
Locke, too, sees God and nature as the sources of the state and of
property. Locke rejects Filmer’s comparison of the state with a
family, arguing instead that political authority has its source in the
natural rights of each individual created equally.
 






Social entities as products of the individual mind
:
Locke’s theory of “nominal essence” is important for
a number of contemporary approaches to social ontology, even though
Locke does not himself associate nominal essences with the social
world in particular. A nominal essence is a definition of a species or
sort of thing, which people assemble in their minds out of ideas.
Individuals generate these definitions when they observe things in the
world and classify them according to their apparent similarities.
Nominal essences, in Locke’s approach, are generated
mentalistically: they are formed from the association of ideas in the
mind. Moreover, they are generated individualistically: a nominal
essence defined by any given person is fully defined by that
person’s own mental states.
 





Much of the ancient and early modern work on social entities can be
understood as an inquiry into the “sources” or
“construction” of the social. Do they have their sources
in nature, in custom, in convention, in God? But we also see the
foundations for a new inquiry that blossomed in the eighteenth
century—not into the 
sources
 of social phenomena, but
into their 
constituents
 or building blocks. (See also
sections
 
2.2
,
 
3
, and
 
4

 for contemporary theories of constituents vs. sources of social
entities.)


1.2 Individuals, Aggregates, and Wholes



Advances in science and interest in political governance led theorists
to draw analogies between the traditional domains of
science—such as heavenly bodies, chemicals, and
organisms—and the newly salient domains of economies and
societies. The push to develop a science of society motivates a
different emphasis in social ontology, as compared to earlier
theories. Whereas ancient and early modern theorists largely
investigated the sources or generators of social entities, these
theorists devoted more attention to analyzing social entities into
their constituent parts.



Philosophers in the Scottish Enlightenment argue that social order
arises from aggregates of individuals interacting with one another,
even if the individuals did not plan the order. “Nations stumble
on establishments”, Ferguson 1767 writes, “which are
indeed the result of human action, but not the execution of any human
design”. Later attempts to develop a rigorous science of the
social world also employ a similar picture of the components of
society. J.S. Mill builds on Comte 1830–1842 to argue that
social science is a branch of psychology. Society, according to Mill,
is the aggregate of human minds, and the topic of the social sciences
is to derive laws governing such aggregates. (Mill 1843) Altogether,
his approach to social phenomena is “psychologistic”: he
takes social phenomena to be built exclusively out of psychological
states of individual people. (The interpretation and expansion of
psychologism becomes an important topic in twentieth century
individualism; see sections
 
3.1
,
 
3.2
, and
 
3.3
.)



The historicist tradition in eighteenth and nineteenth century German
philosophy inverts the relation between individuals and societies.
Rather than seeing individuals as primary, these philosophers stress
the primacy of societies, with individuals a product of the societies
in which they are brought up. Hegel argues that even
self-consciousness is not something that an individual can possess
independently of others. Instead, it depends on our having a sense of
ourselves as individuals as distinct from others, which in turn
depends on mutual interactions (Hegel 1807). Hegel also develops the
idea, following Hölderlin, of a “World-Soul” or
universal human spirit, of which individual actions are a
manifestation. Hegel’s universal spirit is sometimes used as an
example of “ontological holism”—i.e., the claim that
social entities are fundamental, independent, or autonomous entities,
as opposed to being derived from individuals or non-social
entities.



Nineteenth century criminologists, including Taine 1887, Ferri 1884,
Sighele 1891, and Le Bon 1895 investigated mental properties of
crowds, such as impetuousness and irrationality. Tarde 1890 postulated
mechanisms by which crowds acquire these characteristics, by way of
the psychology of individuals and interactions among people. Durkheim
1894 challenged these explanations, arguing that such individualistic
laws cannot be adequate to explain crowd psychology or other social
phenomena. Durkheim argues that “social facts” are
autonomous of individuals and have the power to constrain and affect
their actions. In social ontology, Tarde is often seen as a
representative of “individualism” and Durkheim of
“holism” regarding the social world, and their positions
remain a touchstone for contemporary debates (see
 
section 3
).


1.3 The Construction of Social Categories



Nineteenth-century social criticism reopened the question of the
sources of social categories. Philosophers scrutinized commonplace
categories—often ones that we employ in our daily
practices—revealing that they have darker (or at least richer)
underpinnings than we realize. Their approaches raise questions about
the motivations for using these categories, as well as their nature
and metaphysical sources.



In a section of 
Capital
 titled “The Fetishism of
Commodities and the Secret Thereof”, Karl Marx argues that
certain social categories that might appear natural are in fact the
products of social and economic relations among people (Marx 1867).
Subsequent philosophers put claims of the constructedness of social
entities at the center of social critique. Lukács 1923 argues
that capitalism extensively “reifies” social
entities—that is, it turns phenomena that arise from an
oppressive economic system into features of the world that we regard
as natural (see also Lukács 1964–68 [1986]). The term
‘social ontology’ arises in this tradition: Gittler 1951
draws from Mannheim, who was a colleague of Lukács (see
Mannheim 1929), and Gould 1978, discussing Marx’s theory of the
social world, defines ‘social ontology’ as “a
metaphysical theory of the nature of social reality.”



Friedrich Nietzsche employs a historical or “genealogical”
method in 
On the Genealogy of Morals
 (1887) to critique the
basic categories of Christian morality. Challenging the idea that this
morality is basic to human nature, he argues that prevailing moral
categories were tools intentionally wielded in a struggle for power.
Ideals of humility and self-denial, for instance, were introduced by
leaders of a resentful population to undermine the aristocratic values
of Greco-Roman society. In Nietzsche’s account, the sources of
such categories are largely cognitive and intentional, as opposed to
arising from material relations, as they do in Marx’s
account.



Members of the Frankfurt School, especially Theodor Adorno and Max
Horkheimer, draw on Marx and Nietzsche to argue not just that the
social world becomes “second nature” to us, but that our
current social order is maintained, at least in part, by the causal
effects of our treating social entities and categories as if they were
natural (Adorno & Horkheimer 1947, Adorno 1966). Uncovering social
categories becomes a centerpiece of subsequent social criticism. If
oppressive structures are to be dismantled, the social nature of the
everyday world first needs to be revealed. The work of the Frankfurt
School in particular is influential in contemporary feminist and race
theory (see
 
section 5.4
).


2. The Problem of Demarcating Social Ontology


2.1 Social Versus Non-Social



Social ontology is the study of 
social
 entities and
properties. But which things are social? How are they distinguished
from those that are not social? Not every theory in social ontology
needs to make this distinction—but many rely on it. Michael
Bratman, for instance, analyzes “shared intentions” of a
group in terms of the knowledge and intentions of individual members
of the group (Bratman 1993, 2014). His project is designed to remove
the mystery behind shared intention by analyzing it in terms of
non-social mental states of individual people. More generally,
“psychologistic” theories of the social world sharply
distinguish the social from the non-social. These
theories—descendants of Mill 1843—hold that all social
facts are determined by the psychological states of individual
people.



Demarcating the social may be useful for understanding the domain or
topic of social ontology in general. It also may be pertinent to
specific problems. Guala 2022, for instance, argues for a particular
demarcation of the social in defending a version of individualism
about the social. Guala argues that the social sciences are concerned
with a particular class of social properties—namely, the
“projectible” ones—and that for these, the thesis of
“ontological individualism” holds (see sections
 
3.1
,
 
3.2
, and
 
3.3

 for debates over individualism).



The “level of the social” is often divided from other
“lower levels” in arrangements of the sciences into
hierarchies (Comte 1830–1842, Oppenheim and Putnam 1958, List
2019). This arrangement of the sciences into levels is sometimes
challenged altogether (e.g., Wimsatt 1976, Potochnik and McGill 2012,
Thalos 2013, Eronen 2015, Zahle 2021). But even if certain domains of
science can be arranged into levels, the level of the social has
difficulties unique to it. One is the problem of identifying just
which entities are the social ones. Even cases that would seem
straightforward can be contentious. A crowd, for instance, was
regarded by many in the late nineteenth century as the paradigmatic
social object. But in recent years it has become less obvious that
this is so. Margaret Gilbert, for instance, hesitates to attribute
“sociality” to crowds: sociality, she argues, arises from
norms and commitments, which many crowds lack. According to Gilbert,
it is with joint commitment that a group is genuinely social (Gilbert
1989). Other philosophers and sociologists make alternative claims
about the “mark of the social”, while still others deny
that there is any criterion for distinguishing the social from the
non-social (see Greenwood 1997).



In the last few years, there has been renewed effort to distinguish
social from non-social kinds. Mason 2021 argues that social kinds can
be understood in terms of their essential dependence on certain mental
states. Khalidi 2016 argues that social kinds require mental
sustenance of a particular sort, where non-social kinds do not. Other
recent work proposes criteria for entities and categories to be
“socially constructed.” Schaffer 2017 and Griffith 2018
(both responding in part to skepticism about grounding in social
ontology voiced by Barnes 2014 and Mikkola 2016), propose
grounding-theoretic accounts, according to which entities are socially
constructed just in case they are at least partly grounded in social
features or patterns. Epstein 2016 argues that inasmuch as the social
can be distinguished from the non-social, we need to distinguish two
dimensions: some entities are socially “grounded” but not
socially constructed (e.g., crowds), some socially constructed but not
socially grounded (e.g., phenotypic racial categories, certain
commodity money) and some both (e.g., socio-historical racial
categories, fiat money) (cf. Haslanger 2016a). Many theorists (e.g.,
Mallon 2016, Ásta 2018) do not have a clear stake in
distinguishing the social from the non-social, but do have a rough or
implicit distinction between social and non-social entities in their
theories of social construction.



A second problem is to identify which categories of social entities
are the best focus for analysis of the social world. Social theorists
have treated a variety of different categories of social entities as
basic, including 
social laws
 (Mill 1843, Spencer 1895);

social facts
 (Durkheim 1894, Mandelbaum 1955); 
social
groups
 (Oppenheim & Putnam 1958, Gilbert 1989, Tuomela 2013);

human kinds
 (Boyd 1991, 1999b; Millikan 1999, Mallon 2016);

institutional facts
 (Searle 1995); 
social objects and
social properties
 (Macdonald & Pettit 1981, Ruben 1985);

social predicates
 (Kincaid 1986); 
social practices

(Bourdieu 1977, Giddens 1984, Schatzki 1996); and 
social
processes
 (Whitehead 1929, Rescher 2000, Livet & Nef 2009).
Some theories focus on a category because it is significant, but do
not claim that it comprehensively covers the social world. Others
choose a category of social entities in order to be comprehensive. In
doing this, a theory may aim to set up an exhaustive determination
claim: for instance, it may claim that all social 
objects
 are

composed of
 individual people interacting with one another,
or that all social 
properties supervene on
 individualistic
properties, or that all social 
facts
 are 
grounded by

physical facts. As these examples illustrate, the category of social
entities a theory focuses on is tied to how the theory interprets
“determination” (for more on this, see
 
section 2.2
).



Even more contentious is which objects are 
not
 social. To
many theorists, individual people are paradigmatically non-social.
Many philosophers, however, argue that individuals are socially
constituted (see sections
 
1.2
,
 
3.4.1
, and the sections
 
A.3.2
,
 and
 
A.4.2

 of the supplement on the history of social ontology). Thus some
projects in social ontology look for a middle ground. They intend to
accommodate the social nature of individuals, and yet to account fully
for the social in terms of individuals (see
 
section 3.2.2
).



One option for interpreting the “non-social entities” is
that they include only the objects of physics, chemistry, biology, and
other “hard sciences”. According to some theorists, even
these are socially constructed and therefore fall on the social side
of the division (Pickering 1984, Woolgar 1988). But even presuming
that objects of the “hard sciences” are non-social, they
may be inadequate for practical purposes as a characterization of the
set of non-social things. After all, social theory aims to say more
than merely that the social world is somehow built out of physical
entities (see
 
section 3.2.2
).
 A variety of approaches to the building blocks of the social are
discussed in
 
section 3
.


2.2 What is Meant by the “Building” of the Social World



As seen in
 
section 1

 (and the supplement on history), it is useful to break social
ontology down into two broadly different inquiries. One inquiry asks
what social entities are and how they are determined—what, for
instance, are the conditions for a person to be a woman, or for
something to be a group belief? A second inquiry investigates the
sources or generators of social kinds or entities—that is, what
socially constructs or “anchors” social entities. It is a
matter of some controversy whether this is a sharp distinction, but it
is useful to separate them at least as a matter of clarifying
questions.



To illustrate the distinction, consider a category such as 
animal
sacrifice
. This is a kind of ritual act performed in both
historical and contemporary cultures. The boundaries of this category
are not simple. Animal sacrifice is not the same as ritual slaughter,
though the two acts have many properties in common: the animals killed
in both may be eaten, both acts may be performed by specially
qualified individuals, and both may be subject to specific rules and
performed in specific contexts. The first inquiry into the nature of
animal sacrifice, then, is to clarify the conditions for something to
be in the category: what ontologically determines something is an
animal sacrifice, or what are the constituents of an animal
sacrifice?



Once this is settled, however, there is a second set of ontological
questions regarding the sources of the category 
animal
sacrifice
. What features of the world—social, intellectual,
practical or otherwise—puts this category in place? What
socially constructs the category 
animal sacrifice
 to have the
boundaries or essential properties it does (as analyzed in the first
inquiry)?



A task for each inquiry is to clarify the respective notion of
“determination” or “construction.”


2.2.1 The inquiry into the ontological determination of the social



What is being claimed by a theorist who argues, as Bratman does, that
group intentions are 
determined by
 the attitudes of group
members? Or, as Dretske does, that footprints are 
partly
determined by
 foot-strikes? In these claims, a social entity (a
group intention or a footprint) is held to stand in some relation to
other entities (member attitudes or a past foot-strike). What is this
relation—and is there just one such relation, or are there many
ways that social entities are “built out of” or
“ontologically determined by” other entities?



This part of social ontology is the most pertinent to modeling the
social. A scientist working on models of cells makes use of the fact
that cells are “built of” nuclei, cytoplasm, organelles,
and so on. Similarly, models in social science are often based on
views of the constituents of—or more generally, the things that
ontologically determine—social entities.



Until recently, the most precise discussions of the determination of
social entities made use of various forms of the supervenience
relation (see the entry on
 
supervenience
).
 A virtue of the supervenience relation is that it makes it easy to
articulate important distinctions in precise ways. For instance, maybe
the social properties of the U.S. Senate are exhaustively determined
by the properties of U.S. Senators. Or maybe the social properties of
the U.S. Senate are exhaustively determined by properties of the
population of the entire U.S., or even of the entire world, not just
by properties of Senators. This distinction can be clarified using the
notion of “global supervenience” (see Macdonald &
Pettit 1981, Currie 1984, Kincaid 1986). There are, however,
well-known shortcomings to the supervenience relation as well (see
Fine 2001, Shagrir 2002, K. Bennett 2004a, Correia 2005), as well as
recent critiques of supervenience as relying on an unacceptable
division of the world into “levels” (see Ylikoski 2014,
Zahle 2021).



People interested in the building blocks of the social world often
discuss different “ontological determination” relations
apart from supervenience, including identity, parthood, fusion,
aggregation, set membership, and constitution (see Copp 1984, Ruben
1985, Baker 2004, Sheehy 2006, Effingham 2010, List & Pettit 2011,
Hawley 2017, Harris 2019).



In the last few years, much attention has shifted to metaphysical
grounding as a way to treat ontological determination in general, and
by extension, to the determination of the social. Epstein 2015
proposes a ground-theoretic treatment of social determination (he
further argues that social construction or “anchoring”
should be treated differently). Schaffer 2017, 2021 proposes a unified
ground-theoretic treatment, with all factors in social construction
and determination treated as grounds. Mikkola 2015, 2019 argues
against ground-theoretic approaches to the social in particular; see
Passinsky 2021 for a counter-argument.



If we want to make sense of claims of the form 
XYZs ontologically
determine Ss
, where Ss are social facts or objects or other
entities, the above approaches are interpretations of what is meant by
“ontologically determines” in the claim. An even bigger
question in this inquiry is what kinds of things the XYZs
are—that is, theorizing about the factors that build or
determine the social. For instance, is the social world built out of
mental states, or bodies, or human practices, or irreducibly social
stuff? These different theories are the topic of
 
section 3

 of this entry.


2.2.2 The inquiry into how the social is constructed



A similar set of questions arises in connection with social
construction. What is being claimed by a theorist, as Hume does, that
property is a product of social convention? Or as Searle does, that
money is set up by collectively accepted rules? Or as Marx does, that
commodities are social constructions of relations of production?



Again there are two aspects of these questions: if we want to make
sense of claims of the form 
S is socially constructed by ABC
,
one issue is to clarify “socially constructed by,” and the
other is to theorize about the ABCs—that is, about the things
that do the social construction work. Are the ABCs individual
attitudes, or collective attitudes, or practices, or structures, or
material conditions, etc.? These latter theories are the topic of
 
section 4

 of this entry.



It still remains, however, to clarify what sort of relation or
operation “social construction” is. There is much less
general theorizing of this topic than of “ontological
determination.” There seem to be two reasons for this:
theorizing about the nature of social construction tends to go
hand-in-hand with theories of the ABCs—i.e., the things that do
the construction work. If one argues that such-and-such attitudes are
the things that construct social categories, then one implicitly also
argues that social construction is to be understood as the kind of
thing that the possession of those attitudes produces. Another reason
is that many theorists who aim to give general accounts of the
“social construction relation” regard it to be an aspect
of (or equivalent to) ontological determination. So a theorist who
understands ontological determination in terms of grounding will then
interpret social construction in terms of grounding as well.



Epstein 2019b (and elsewhere) argues that these inquiries ought to be
sharply distinguished from one another. He introduces the term
‘anchoring’ to denote the “social
construction” operation, and argues that anchoring cannot be
understood as grounding (or as meta-grounding), but is a distinct
relation. Haslanger 2016a, Hawley 2019, and Schaffer 2019 agree that
there is a practical distinction between the two, but argue against
the sharp distinction. Haslanger proposes that anchoring be understood
as a kind of epistemic “scaffolding” instead, and Hawley
and Schaffer argue that anchoring should be understood in terms of
grounding. Schaffer proposes that the distinction should be understood
much like Dretske’s distinction between structuring and
triggering causes (Dretske 1988).


2.3 Ontology Versus Causation



Another difficulty in analyzing social entities is in distinguishing
ontological from merely causal relations. In both of the two inquiries
described in the previous subsection—the inquiry into the
determination or definition of social entities and the inquiry into
the social construction or anchoring of social entities—we can
distinguish causal determination from ontological determination.



In connection with social construction, for instance, Kukla 2000,
Haslanger 2003, and Kõiv 2019, for instance, distinguish
“causal construction” from “constitutive
construction,” the former involving social factors in

causing or producing
 facts about the world, and the latter
involving social factors in the 
constitution or ontology
 of
facts about the world.



Likewise, grounding is often characterized as “non-causal
determination,” in contrast to causal determination. There is
some controversy about the distinction altogether: Bennett 2017, for
instance, argues that causation is a “building relation,”
more similar to relations like grounding and composition than is
commonly acknowledged. But most metaphysicians endorse the distinction
(more on this at the end of this subsection).



In many cases, the distinction between the ontological and the causal
is fairly straightforward. The Battle of the Somme, for instance, is
part of World War I. That battle is not a cause of the war. It is a
constituent of it: the Battle of the Somme is ontologically rather
than causally related to World War I. The 1881 formation of the Triple
Alliance, on the other hand, is causally related to the war, not
ontologically.



Other cases, however, are more challenging, and it is not always easy
to distinguish when entities stand in ontological rather than causal
relations. We could argue that the formation of the Triple Alliance is
only causally related to the war because it took place long before the
war began. But temporal remoteness is not always good evidence. Even
if causes must always precede their effects, identifying causally
related events is complicated by the fact that events extend over long
periods of time. (The weather in January 1916 is causally and not
ontologically related to World War I, although the war stretched on
before and after that month.) Furthermore, there might be
instantaneous or even backward causation (see entry on
 
backward causation
).



The more significant complication, however, is that (arguably)
ontological relations need not be synchronic. For a mental state to be
a 
memory
, for instance, it must be caused by the event of
which it is a memory. Likewise, a mark’s being a

footprint
 partly depends on historical events: it requires
that the mark was made by the strike of a foot (Dretske 1988,
Stalnaker 1989). And for a person to be 
President of the United
States
, an election must have taken place beforehand. Some
theories of the social world insist that a social entity can only
ontologically depend on synchronic facts about the world. Classical
structuralism, influenced by Saussure 1916, regards social structures
as synchronic, with the social structure at time 
t
 being a
product of the mental states of individuals at time 
t
 (see
 
section 4.1
).
 John Searle’s theory of institutional facts (Searle 1995, 2010)
also regards social entities as being synchronically dependent: the
institutional facts at time 
t
 are a product of attitudes in
the community at time 
t
 together with a synchronic residue of
historical events that Searle calls the “background”. Work
in a variety of domains, however, argues for an ontological role of
historical factors. Among these are theories of semantic content
(Kripke 1972, Putnam 1975, Davidson 1987), biological and social kinds
(Millikan 1984), artworks (Levinson 1980), and artifacts (Bloom 1996,
Thomasson 2003). Diachronic ontological determination is a matter of
controversy: in favor see Epstein 2015, Schaffer 2019; opposed see
Bernstein 2016; for an intermediate position see Baron et al.
2020.



Distinguishing causation from ontology does not imply that causal
relations are ontologically irrelevant. Having causal effects may be a
criterion for an entity to be real (Gellner 1956, Bhaskar 1975,
Elder-Vass 2010). Causal structure is also often regarded as central
to the nature of various entities. Several theorists argue that

kinds
 are individuated by their causal roles (Fodor 1974,
Khalidi 2018). Some theorists of biological and artifactual kinds
regard patterns of reproduction to be part of what individuates these
kinds. And some theorists of human kinds regard certain causal
feedback loops to be characteristic of human kinds (see
 
section 4.3.3
).
 The burden of such accounts is to distinguish the causal factors that
are part of an account of ontology from those that are
“merely” causally connected.



Much of the recent discussion of the relation between causal and
ontological relations can be found in the literature on
“grounding” and “ontological dependence”,
including Rosen 2010, Audi 2012, Correia & Schnieder 2012, Fine
2012, Raven 2015, the entry on
 
metaphysical grounding
,
 and the entry on
 
ontological dependence
.
 Many philosophers who sharply distinguish causal and ontological
determination nonetheless argue for important similarities between the
two (cf. Fine 2012, Schaffer 2016). Others stress the structural
differences (cf. Bernstein 2016, Koslicki 2016). There is also recent
work to treat grounding and causation as species of a common genus
(cf. Wilson 2018, Wilhelm 2021). Some philosophers also challenge the
practical import of the distinction. Marques 2017, for instance,
argues that constitutive construction is less significant for
political and practical purposes than is causal construction.


2.4 Realism and Anti-realism Regarding the Social



Given that the subject matter of social ontology is entities that
are—in one way or another—products of the social, they are
generally taken to depend in some way on minds or human cognition.
From its beginnings, theories of the social have been concerned with
the fact that apparently natural features of the world are in fact
products of society (this is evident in Marx and Lukacs, but arguably
is present even in ancient debates; see
 
Social ontology: History
.)
 The extent to which the social is “real” is thus a
continuing theme in theories of the social.



Work on social construction in the 1980s and early 1990s tended to
regard claims of social construction as being at odds with realism,
where a stark contrast was made between the social as mind-dependent
and the real as mind-independent (see Gergen 1999, 2001). In the
1990s, philosophers began to attempt to develop moderate positions,
according to which mind-dependence can be to some extent compatible
with realism. One tradition developing this point is “Critical
Realism,” taking off from the work of Bhaskar (1975a, 1993).
Critical realists, including Archer 1995, Lawson 1997, and Elder-Vass
2010, 2012, argue that events in the world—social as well as
natural—arise from the interactions between the causal powers of
things. Social entities are mind-dependent inasmuch as they are
generated from interactions among people as well as things. But social
entities are nonetheless real, themselves having emergent causal
powers.



Searle 1995 argues at length about realism, but largely focuses on
social constructionist critiques of realism about the external world.
In contrast to “brute” entities, which are independent of
our representations, Searle argues that social entities “are
only what they are, because we believe that is what they are.”
(Searle 1997). According to Searle, the central paradox of the social
is making sense of the fact that claims about them are objective, yet
they depend on subjective experience. Searle aims to reconcile these
two, arguing that social reality is ontologically subjective, yet that
claims about it are epistemically objective (Searle 2010). Baker 2019
and Mason 2020 argue that Searle’s position ought to be
understood as anti-realist.



Some philosophers have closely identified mind-dependence with
anti-realism. Others dispute this (e.g., Jansen 2017, Baker 2019,
Passinsky 2020, Mason 2020) arguing that it is a mistake to deny the
reality of social entities on the basis that they are mind-dependent.
Instead they contend that social entities are both real and
mind-dependent.



Much of the debate about realism is tied to how realism and
anti-realism are to be understood. See entries on
 
Challenges to Metaphysical Realism
,
 on
 
Realism
,
 and on
 
Scientific Realism
.
 The literature on the metaphysics of ordinary objects also bears on
questions of realism and social entities. Eliminativists about
ordinary objects argue that a large swath of ordinary objects (such as
cars, tables, and mountains) do not exist. Many of the considerations
bearing on the existence of ordinary objects would apply equally to
social objects. See entry on
 
Ordinary Objects
.


3. Constituents of Social Entities



The first general category of questions social ontology investigates
involves the constituents, or building blocks, or grounds of social
entities. One way of thinking about this is to grant that our social
categories have been constructed as they are. (How they get
constructed is a separate inquiry, discussed in
 
section 4.
)
 Grant, for instance, that we have the legal and economic systems we
do. What, then, are the constituents of a corporation? What are the
necessary and sufficient conditions for someone to be American, or to
have a particular gender? What is it for an event to be a performance
of Beethoven’s Eroica?



Some theories strive to give very general answers to questions like
these. They aim to fill in for 
X
 in the formula: 
All
social entities are exhaustively determined by (or are constituted by,
or supervene on, or are grounded by, etc.) entities of type X
.
That is, they argue for a particular “determination base”
for the social entities. A large class of theories fill in
‘X’ with strictly non-social entities. Others argue that
this asks too much: they agree that we can analyze constituents of
social entities, but deny that social entities decompose into
non-social parts. Still others reject the question altogether. And
within all these views a variety of positions are taken on what the
“determination” or building relation is (see
 
section 2.2.1
).



Other theories make less ambitious claims. Instead of searching for an
exhaustive determination base for 
all
 social entities, they
focus on a particular subset of social entities. Or even more
modestly, they aim to analyze certain social entities in terms of
other social parts—such as a battalion in terms of platoons, or
an industry in terms of corporations.



Many positions on these matters descend from the debates between
individualism versus holism that took place in the early part of the
twentieth century (cf. O’Neill 1973, Udehn 2001, Zahle &
Collin 2014a). Individualism is the somewhat vague thesis that the
social is built exclusively out of individual people. Holism is the
even vaguer thesis that social entities are “sui generis”,
or ontologically fundamental in some sense. Some recent work aims to
clarify these (cf. List & Spiekermann 2013, Epstein 2014b, entry
on
 
methodological holism in the social sciences
),
 while some rejects the terms of that debate (e.g., Zahle 2021).


3.1 Ontological Individualism



Many theories aim to remove the mystery from the social world by
characterizing a non-social “determination base.” That is,
a domain of strictly non-social entities that exhaustively determines
the social. Among these, the bulk of theories are varieties of
“ontological individualism”: that is, that the social is
exhaustively determined by facts about individual people.



Even within ontological individualism, there are various theories:
some theorists hold that 
psychological
 facts about people
exhaustively determine the social, while others hold that

more
 than psychological facts are required. Many theorists
assume that some version of ontological individualism is correct, but
that has recently been challenged and debated (see
 
section 3.2
).


3.1.1 Psychologism



Psychologism is the view that social facts are composed exclusively
out of the psychological states of individual people. This is the view
advanced by Mill 1843 (see section
 
1.2

 and also section
 
A.3.1

 of the supplement on the history of social ontology) and endorsed by
subsequent theorists of the “social mind” such as Tarde
1898, 1901. Economists in the late nineteenth and early twentieth
centuries also advocated psychologism (Jevons 1871, Wicksteed 1910,
Pareto 1916), as did mid-century social theorists (Popper 1945,
Watkins 1952). The term ‘psychologism’ is a little
confusing. Karl Popper, for instance, uses this word as a pejorative
regarding a particular kind of methodology in social science. But when
it comes to ontology, he endorses Mill’s view (Popper 1945).



Most historical versions of psychologism are “internalist”
in that they regard the contents of mental states as depending only on
what is inside a person’s head. (“Externalist”
psychologism is discussed in
 
section 3.3.1
.
 For discussion of internalism versus externalism, see entry on
 
externalism about mental content
.)



Psychologism is a claim about ontology; it is compatible with taking
psychological states to be 
caused
 by non-psychological
factors. Jane’s belief that the wind is blowing is caused in
part by the blowing of the wind. But her psychological state,
according to internalists, is a matter of her brain or other internal
states, and does not include the wind. According to psychologism, the
social world is determined exclusively by these internal psychological
states.



Versions of psychologism differ when it comes to 
whose
psychological states
 a given social entity or fact is determined
by or depends on. Some theories are “globally dependent”:
they take a fact like 
Gallius and Tiberius are slaves
 to
depend on the psychological states of a larger population, not just
those of Gallius and Tiberius (Currie 1984). Other theories are
“locally dependent”. Many theories of group attitudes
argue that the beliefs, intentions, and other attitudes of a given
group depend only on the attitudes of the members of that group
(Gilbert 1987, 1994, Wray 2001, Tuomela & Miller 1988, Tuomela
1992, Bratman 1993, Wray 2001, Lackey 2021). Some theorists have
challenged local dependence even for group attitudes (Bird 2010;
Epstein 2022).



“Conferralism,” put forward by Ásta 2008, 2010,
2013, 2018, argues that social properties like gender and race are
determined by the attitudes of people toward individuals in particular
contexts. A social property is “conferred” on an object,
according to Ásta, if the object has the property because of
some attitudes of people. A baseball umpire, for instance, confers the
property of being a strike on certain pitches. Gender and racial
categories are conferred by communities of individuals, but they can
shift in different contexts. So a person might have one gender
conferred by their family at home and a different one when they are
among their peers. Conferrals, Ásta argues, need not be a
matter of 
actual
 beliefs or acceptances of community members,
but rather may be a product of community dispositions. That is, how
members of the community are disposed to use concepts in
counterfactual situations.



Theories also differ when it comes to 
which psychological
states
 determine social entities or facts. The theories of group
attitudes just mentioned hold that group attitudes are determined not
just by psychological states in general, but by particular attitudes
on the part of members. Broader versions of psychologism (e.g.,
Mill’s) are less specific about which psychological states are
involved.



Finally, theories differ when it comes to 
which social
entities
 are determined by psychological states. Theories of
group attitudes, for instance, limit their claims to the group
attitudes alone. Other views, such as those of Mill and Popper,
propose that psychological states exhaustively determine social facts
in general.


3.1.2 Atomism




Social atomism
 (or 
atomistic individualism
) holds
that the social world is built out of individual people understood as
isolated “atoms”. As Taylor 1985 points out, the term
‘atomism’ is mostly used by its enemies, so its
characterization often depends on what it is used to be a foil for.
But, typically, atomism is a combination of two claims: the view that
society is exclusively built out of individual people, and that
individual people are somehow isolated from one another, as opposed to
being mutually interdependent.



Some theories are accused of being atomistic in the sense that they
treat individuals as isolated and non-interacting. Neoclassical
economic theory is sometimes challenged on this basis; others point
out that even in basic neoclassical models relations among individuals
are incorporated in markets, prices, and other features (see Samuelson
1966, Arrow 1994).



The term ‘atomism’ is also used to indicate theories that
neglect the causal or historical influences of society on individuals.
A model may neglect social conditioning altogether, for instance by
treating individual preferences as exogenous or given parts of a
social model. Or, instead, people at a historical starting point may
be regarded as isolated or non-social. ‘Atomism’ in this
sense is applied to Hobbesian or “state or nature” views
that give an account of the development of society starting with
non-social individuals encountering one another (see Pettit 1993).


3.1.3 Bodies, actions, and relations



Theorists in several fields have turned away from mentalistic
treatments of the building blocks of the social. Psychologism
presupposed that the social sciences are sciences of the
“mind” or “psyche” of society. However, the
social sciences study not just social thoughts, but actions. This
suggests a different and larger determination-base for the
social—that is, a larger set of blocks out of which the social
world is built. After all, actions are not the same as thoughts or
behaviors, but involve the world.



Even behaviorism (Skinner 1953) rejects the idea that the social is
built out of internal psychological states. Instead, it argues that
only externally observable human behaviors can be the basis of a
scientific inquiry into the psychological and social sciences. Still,
behaviorism resembles psychologism more than it departs from it: it
replaces the internal states of minds with the “outputs”
of the mind in behavior, and takes the social to be exhaustively
determined by those outputs or behaviors (see entry on
 
behaviorism
).



More recent theories depart from psychologism by introducing
additional entities into the determination base of social entities.
While List and Pettit 2002 argue that group attitudes supervene on
individual attitudes, in List and Pettit 2011 they expand the base to
include actions and dispositions. Kincaid 1986 claims that the social
supervenes on individualistic properties 
and
 relations

and
 actions. Hodgson 2007 argues that this distinction is
crucial: theories that neglect relations are mistaken, while theories
that include relations are plausible. This is disputable, however:
most of the relations Hodgson discusses supervene on intrinsic
properties of individuals, and arguing that the ontological
individualist needs to be clearer about which properties (and
relations) should get included in the “determination
base.”


3.2 Material Building Blocks, In Addition to Individuals



Though ontological individualism is widely assumed, it has recently
come under criticism (see Epstein 2009, Hindriks 2013, Ylikoski 2014,
Elder-Vass 2017, Haslanger 2022). These critics argue that ontological
individualism—even if construed generously—is false. In
part, these arguments draw on work from a variety of disciplines on
the role of material factors in the building blocks of the social.


3.2.1 Resources



Other theories argue that among the constituents of the social are
also resources and other features of the world. For instance, many
microeconomic models include variables not only for attributes of
individual people, but also for bundles of resources possessed by
those people, or for such things as capital goods or geographic
locations. Another example is Edith Penrose’s “resource
theory” of the firm (Penrose 1959). Penrose proposes that firms
(corporations, partnerships, etc.) be understood as collections of
distinctive resources, including real estate, capital goods, and
material processes.



Despite such examples, it is often unclear whether such theories
genuinely take goods and resources to be 
ontologically

related to social entities. Or instead, whether they regard resources
to interact causally with social entities, but not to constitute them.
Moreover, even in models that include resources, often only individual
choices are modeled as having causal powers: resources have no causal
import except as mediated by the attitudes and actions of individuals.
Even Penrose’s theory of the firm focuses most of its attention
on “capabilities”, understood as knowledge and skills of
human actors, and subsequent literature derived from Penrose focuses
even more on capabilities as the exemplar of resources (e.g., Teece et
al. 1997).



A more unequivocal turn away from mentalism and toward the external
world in constituting social entities occurred in the 1980s in
sociology and anthropology. Theorists in these fields began to pay a
great deal of attention to how 
bodies
 cope in the practical
world.


3.2.2 Physicalism



The most prominent theories arguing for non-social building blocks of
the social are individualistic in either a narrow or broad sense.
Either the social is exhaustively determined by the psychological
states of individual people, or by these plus behaviors, bodies, and
actions, or by these plus resource bundles allocated to individuals.
An alternative is to reject individualism altogether, and instead
regard the determination base of the social to include (at least
potentially) any physical entities whatever. Physicalism is often
understood to be the view that all facts—the social ones
included—are ontologically determined by physical facts. (This
“determination” is often understood in terms of
supervenience or grounding; see entry on
 
physicalism
).



Physicalism—on this and related understandings—has
difficulties as well. It is difficult to define physicalism, and in
particular to ensure that it is not trivial. Clarifying the thesis of
physicalism involves circumscribing what counts as
“physical”, just as individualism involves clarifying what
counts as “individualistic”. If the physical entities are
to be a non-social “base” that exhaustively determines the
social, then it is required that the social not be included in that
base. (See sections
 
3.4

 and
 
3.5

 for challenges to the separation of the social from the
nonsocial.)



Moreover, it is unclear if physicalism is true. In fact, certain
social entities seem to be good candidates for counterexamples to at
least some versions of physicalism. One widely discussed problem with
a supervenience interpretation of physicalism, for instance, is the
“grounding” problem regarding the modal properties of
coinciding objects (K. Bennett 2004b). The classic example used to
discuss coinciding objects is an artwork—a statue—and the
clay that constitutes it (Gibbard 1975). Other social entities work
equally well for the same point, such as cases of distinct social
groups with the same members (see
 
section 5.1
).
 On the relation of constitution to physicalism, see Baker 2019.


3.3 Partial or Mixed Theories



Some theorists who favor individualism but also recognize its flaws
have proposed qualified or mixed theories. Philip Pettit 1993 has
argued for a version of individualism in which social entities are
exhaustively determined by the mental states of individuals, but those
mental states, in turn, can be determined in part by social entities.
And “institutional individualists” argue that any
particular social phenomenon can be understood in individualistic
terms, but only within a social or institutional context.


3.3.1 Externalist psychologism



A variant of psychologism takes an externalist approach to mental
states. Externalism is the view that mental states ontologically
depend on facts about the external world. It holds that, for instance,
the content of a person’s concept of water partly depends on the
actual structure of samples of water in the person’s
environment; and likewise that the content of a person’s concept
of the U.S. Government partly depends on the external entity that is
the U.S. Government (see the entry on
 
externalism about mental content
).



This version of psychologism regards the social to be exhaustively
determined by externalist mental states. Mid-century opponents of
standard psychologism (Mandelbaum 1955, Gellner 1956, Goldstein 1958)
had raised the problem of attitudes toward social entities, but it is
not clear in those views whether the external world was causally or
constitutively related to the mental states. Following Kripke 1972 and
Putnam 1975, the explicitly externalist view was developed by Bhargava
1992 and Pettit 1993. Pettit argues for externalist psychologism as a
qualified version of individualism. Like more standard psychologism,
he takes social phenomena to be exhaustively determined by mental
states. The mental states in question, however, are partly constituted
by external stuff.



Externalist psychologism, if correct, would pare down the
determination base of the social world to one kind of (partly social)
entity. It faces hurdles, however. First, it must explain how it
avoids circularity—that is, social entities depend on attitudes
toward those entities that depend on the social entities themselves.
Second and more seriously, it needs to explain why this is a plausible
determination base for the social. According to this view, the
external world figures profoundly into the determination of the
social—but only when it is a constituent of attitudes.
Strangely, when the external world is not a constituent of attitudes,
it plays no role in the determination of the social.


3.3.2 Institutional individualism



To be useful, it is not necessary to provide a complete account of the
social world, nor to analyze social entities “all the way
down” to some fundamental level. Many social scientists aim to
give partial accounts of social phenomena in terms of individuals,
situated within a social context.



A certain type of hate-crime, for instance, might be usefully analyzed
as constituted in part by a speech act. That may be useful for social
science or law, whether or not we can say much about the nature of
speech acts. In economics, general equilibrium models are often
designed to represent sets of households (as opposed to individuals),
endowments of resources, sets of firms, goods, and other entities such
as bonds and governments (Mas-Colell et al. 1995: Ch. 19). In models
like these, some ontological work is implicitly done, in their partial
analysis of economic systems into components. It is also common in
sociological theory to analyze social entities into other social parts
(see section
 
5.3
).



Popper and his students put forward a hybrid methodology for social
science, which favors individualistic explanations in a local context
or “situation”, but takes institutions as background
conditions that are treated as exogenous. This methodology is often
known as “institutional individualism” (Agassi 1975, J.S.
Coleman 1990, Jarvie 1998, Udehn 2001). This, however, is an approach
to methodology, not a claim about the nature of the social. These
models do not generally commit themselves to ontological claims either
about the nature of these entities or about which social entities the
various components constitute. Popper, for one, argues for the
indispensability of institutions in social explanation, but has a
psychologistic ontology of institutions (and all social entities).


3.4 Socially Constituted Building Blocks



Some hold that it is fruitless to search for non-social building
blocks of the social world. That does not mean, however, that they
renounce analysis of the social altogether. Instead, they try to shed
light on the determination of the social in terms of other social
components.



Some of these projects make similar claims to the ones in the last
section. That is, they propose sets of entities that exhaustively
determine the social world—but they propose sets consisting of

social
 entities. Other projects are more modest. They aim at
partial accounts, rather than exhaustive ones. Just as one might break
a car down into chassis, engine, transmission, etc., one might break
social entities into mid-sized parts even if that breakdown is not
fully exhaustive, and even if those parts are not themselves
analyzed.



For those projects that do attempt to give an exhaustive analysis of
the social in terms of other social building blocks, a recurring worry
is whether they can avoid being circular. If we were trying to explain
the nature of water, it would hardly do to say that it is built out of
watery parts. Likewise, it is unclear what we have accomplished if we
argue that social entity 
x
 is ontologically determined by
social entity 
y
, and then that 
y
 in turn is partly
ontologically determined by 
x
.


3.4.1 Socially constituted individuals



Other theorists argue that people or selves are socially constituted.
Husserl argues that even the content of an individual’s sensory
perception is conditioned by the community of other conscious
individuals. A person’s subjectivity thus depends on
intersubjectivity (Husserl 1936: Sec. 71, 1950: Secs.
55–60).



A view like this—much like the externalist psychologism
discussed above—can be seen as individualistic in some sense.
Though it does not argue that the social world is determined by
non-social or pre-social individuals, it still holds that the social
is determined by individuals. Husserl, for one, argues that the social
world is the community of intersubjectively constituted
individuals.



Many views of the self as socially constituted implicitly equate the
self with the individual mind, consciousness, or mental states. Among
many others, Hegel argues that self-consciousness—and hence the
existence of the self—depends on recognition from others (see
section
 
1.2
,
 Laitinen 2002, Ikäheimo and Laitinen 2011, and also section
 
A.3.2

 of the supplement); Scheler 1913 that the fundamental kind of
experience is experience-with-one-another; Mead 1913, 1934 that
individual experience and self-consciousness emerge from a social
matrix of communication processes; and Berger and Luckmann 1966 that
individuals are constituted by the social roles with which they
identify. MacIntyre 1984 argues that selves are constituted by social
narratives; Gould 1988 that individuals are ontologically primary and
yet essentially stand in social relations; Taylor 1989 that the self
is constituted through the participation in moral frameworks; and
Davis 2003 develops a social narrative theory of the individual in
economics.



Other views focus on the social constitution of the body. Foucault
1976, 1977a and Butler 1988, 1990, 1993, among others, hold that an
adequate theory of the self involves the construction of bodies as
much as it does the construction of mental states. And they argue that
human bodies are largely products of discourse and the exercise of
social power. However, in interpreting these views it is important to
distinguish claims about the 
constituents
 of selves and
bodies from claims about how kinds and categories are 
set up
.
At least to some extent, these are theories of how narratives and
practices set up categories for classifying bodies (see sections
 
4.4

 and
 
5.4
).


3.4.2 Practices and embodied agency



Theories of practice, developed in anthropology in the 1970s and
1980s, turn their attention to actions, routines, and the engagement
of people with the world. A range of theories are now classified under
the broad rubric of “theories of practice”: Bourdieu 1977
and Giddens 1984 are the most prominent, but theorists as diverse as
Foucault, Garfinkel, Butler, Latour, Taylor, Ortner, and Schatzki are
also counted among the practice theorists.



A practice is a “way of doing” some activity, involving
how people in a culture not only think, but also behave, speak, feel,
and interact with objects in the environment. Consider, for instance,
a way of cooking in a given culture. Cooking involves bodily movements
that individuals reproduce, objects in the environment that
individuals handle in routine ways, explicit and background knowledge,
and people’s intentions and choices. Individuals, according to
practice theory, are always involved in the performance of practices,
but those performances are not limited to the bodies and minds of the
performing individuals. Bourdieu 1990 takes practices to be
exhaustively determined by sets of objectively observable behaviors.
But other theories argue for the primacy of the “type”
over the “token”: it does not make sense to say that a
practice supervenes on its performances, since the performances are
individuated by reference to the practice.



Some theories of practice are, to a certain extent, individualistic.
Practice theory is largely concerned with bodily activity—the
ways people move, carry themselves, and act skillfully—as it is
reproduced in a culture. Individual agents are the
“carriers” of practices (Reckwitz 2002, Rouse 2007).
Still, practices involve not only attitudes and mental
representations, but also objects in the world: pans, stoves,
vegetables, and sauces are among the constituents of cooking practices
(Sewell 1992, 2005; Kukla and Lance 2014). Moreover, individual
activities themselves depend on the social: they are partly
constituted by the cultural practices of which they are instances
(Haslanger 2018).


3.5 Top-Down and Flat Approaches



Although it is common to distinguish individualism and holism as the
two poles in debates over social ontology, the range of views
discussed in the preceding sections show that individualism is not the
only alternative to holism. Even among views discussed in sections
 
3.1

 and
 
3.2
—ones
 that take the social to be built out of non-social
components—there are both individualistic and
non-individualistic alternatives to holism.



Holism also might be understood in various ways. In principle, some
versions of holism may be dualist: i.e., proposing separate spheres of
the individualistic and the social, akin to the Cartesian distinction
between bodies and mind. While dualism has seen a resurgence in the
philosophy of mind, it is not clear how it could be plausible at all
for the social. So most holists about the social are
“monist” in one way or another: they take the social to be
fundamental or to have ontological priority. Or else they put forward
a “flat” ontology, according to which entities of all
kinds exist and yet stand in no ontological priority with respect to
one another.


3.5.1 Ontological priority of the social



One version of social holism regards social entities to be
ontologically prior or fundamental, and individual people (and other
entities) to be ontologically derivative on the social. This sort of
monism is often associated with Hegel (see
 
section A.3.2

 of the supplement) and the British idealists, such as Green 1866 and
Bradley 1893.



Some mid-century social theories also seem to take this position.
Classical structuralism emphasizes the priority of structure over the
individual, following Saussure’s arguments for the ontological
priority of the linguistic system over the individual sign (1916). In
its initial applications to anthropology, roles in a cultural system
were analyzed in terms of the system as a whole. By the 1960s,
however, the point was applied not just to roles but to individuals
themselves. Althusser 1965 and Balibar 1965, for instance, argue for a
“theoretical anti-humanism” in which causal explanation is
predominantly structural:





Men only appear in the theory as supports for the relationships
implied in the structure, and the forms of their individuality only
appear as the determined effects of the structure. (Balibar 1965)





The functionalist sociology of Talcott Parsons 1951 also prioritizes
social structure over individual agency. Parsons is often understood
as arguing that individual action is little more than a manifestation
of social functions, and is severely criticized (notably by Garfinkel
1967) on the grounds that he inappropriately discounts individual
agency. Much work has been done in recent years to reconcile
structural and individual explanations of action (e.g., Garfinkel
1981, Risjord 2000, Martin 2009, Haslanger 2016b).



It is not always clear, however, whether the explanatory priority of
the social over the individual entails a claim about ontological
priority. Functional systems, even ones that strip individuals of
their freedom to act independently, may nonetheless be exhaustively
grounded in “low-level” entities.


3.5.2 Flat ontologies



Other approaches reject any ordering or hierarchy of entities
altogether. Some views deny that the sciences can be divided into
hierarchies, but allow that certain entities are composed of others. A
more radical view is that there is no building at all among entities.
A prominent example is Actor-Network Theory (Latour 2005, Callon 1999,
Law 2009). All entities, in this approach, are potentially on a par
with one another. Even identifying an entity or a class of things as
“social” is a mistake, according to Latour. Latour
distinguishes certain roles that objects can play: they can act as
“mediators”, transforming meaning, and they can act as
“intermediaries”, transmitting meaning without
transforming it. An atom, a person, a machine, a mountain, or a bank,
have equal potential to play these roles. All the
scientist—social or natural—can do is to write narratives
that trace associations. Other approaches to flat ontology include
“assemblage theory” (DeLanda 2006), “object-oriented
ontology” (Harman 2005), and “scale-free
metaphysics” (Thalos 2013).


4. How Social Categories and Kinds Are Constructed



Inquiry into the constituents or “stuff” of the social
world, discussed in the last section, is a huge field. But there is
another field of inquiry with an array of approaches in social
ontology: the inquiry into how social categories or kinds are set up,
constructed, or anchored. Consider, for instance, the fact 
Fred
and Ginger are dancing the foxtrot
. The “stuff” of
the dance is the two people moving around in some pattern. But, we
might ask, what sets up the category 
foxtrot
? Why do the
moves determine what dance it is, rather than the material of floor
they are dancing on or the brand of shoes they are wearing? What makes
it the case that dances are categorized into foxtrots versus sambas
versus salsas; or, for that matter, certain sequences of movement into
dances versus strolls versus marches?



Here are a few options one might start with:




A crude mentalistic theory: the fact that the dance is a foxtrot
is a product of the fact that I believe it is a foxtrot.


A crude naturalistic theory: social categories are natural
features of reality, with the physical structure of the world breaking
reality down into categories, one of which is the foxtrot.


A crude linguistic theory: we define the word
‘foxtrot’, and that definition specifies the conditions
for an entity to be a foxtrot.





The following sections discuss more developed views taking off from
these ideas.
 
Section 4.1

 discusses theories that are 
both mentalistic and
individualistic:
 i.e., those holding that the metaphysical source
of a person’s social categories is that person’s own
mental states.
 
Section 4.2

 discusses mentalistic theories that involve many or all the mental
states of people in a community, rather than each person for herself.
 
Section 4.3

 discusses theories that regard social categories to be set up by
patterns of properties and causes.
 
Section 4.4

 discusses theories that include practices in setting up social
categories, and
 
section 4.5

 discusses pluralistic and heterogeneous theories.
 
Section 4.6

 discusses the potential roles for language in setting up social
categories.



Importantly, any given theory of the source of social categories can
take different positions on the topics discussed in
 
section 3
—i.e.,
 on what the constituents or building blocks of social entities are. A
set of theorists might disagree about how foxtrots (or other social
entities, or entities in general) are 
constituted
—e.g.,
by people, or patterns, or physical configurations of atoms, or
sensible particulars, or impressions, etc. And yet all might agree
that a person’s categories are 
set up
 by that
person’s own mental states (compare, for instance, Berkeley
1710, Russell 1929, and Dennett 1991). Conversely, a set of theorists
might all agree on how foxtrots are constituted, yet disagree on what
metaphysically sets up that category.


4.1 Social Categories as a Product of Each Person’s Own Mental States



Many philosophical traditions investigate how individuals mentally
construct, organize, categorize, or represent social objects—and
objects more generally. Some views regard social categories to be
concepts that individual minds assemble in order to organize
subjective impressions. An example is a Lockean “nominal
essence” theory of social categories (see
 
section A.2.4

 of the supplement). In this theory, a given person’s social
category 
foxtrot
 is an idea in that person’s mind,
formed out of combinations of impressions or other ideas internal to
that person’s mind.



A staggering variety of theorists approach social construction along
these lines. Indeed, until the middle of the twentieth century, it was
tacitly assumed in many philosophical traditions that the social
world, or social categories, are set up by the mental states of
individuals. These theories range from Quine’s view that
categorization arises from the “web of belief” that each
individual possesses (Quine 1951) to the approach of classical
structuralism that takes each person to have a “mental
structure” that determines their own social categories
(Lévi-Strauss 1945, 1963) to theories in psychology that
understand social categories as concepts that individuals mentally
impose on the world (Piaget 1926, Cohen & Lefebvre 2005).



The range of critiques of such approaches is just as varied, but
especially serious difficulties are how to make sense of
intersubjectivity and objectivity (Husserl 1950, Wittgenstein 1953),
challenges to the idea that our minds impose “schemes” on
perceptual content (Sellars 1956, Davidson 1963), and challenges to
the “internalism” of these approaches, i.e., taking the
labor of construction to be entirely borne by the mental (Putnam
1975).


4.2 Social Categories as a Product of Community-Wide Mental States



Instead of taking social categories to be products of individual
minds, another class of theories holds that they are the products of
the minds in a community taken together. Hume 1740 argues that
promises are a product of a social convention. We have a convention,
according to Hume, of the following form: words uttered according to a
certain formula incur an obligation. When someone utters a phrase of
the form ‘I promise to 
S
’, the speaker is
obligated to perform 
S
. According to this theory, the
conditions for an utterance to be a promise are set up by beliefs and
expectations of the members of the community at large.



Theories in this broad class take different approaches to how
community mental states set up social categories.


4.2.1 Social categories set up by agreement



Agreement, according to some historical theories, is the source of
law, language, and the state (see section
 
1.1
,
 and also sections
 
A.1

 and
 
A.2.1

 of the supplement). Agreement still plays a role in contemporary
theories of some social phenomena, but that role is typically to
ground the obligations associated with phenomena. For instance,
according to the “will theory of contract”, contractual
obligations are grounded by the intentional choices of each party to
be bound to a commitment (see Fried 1981, Barnett 1985). When it comes
to setting up social categories, it seems less likely that actual
agreements are available to be their metaphysical sources. Instead,
even theories that are putatively agreement-based tend to place
agreement in a different role. Gauthier 1986, for instance, advances
an agreement-based theory of morality. By his account, however, the
justification for moral claims is based on what people 
rationally
would
 agree to: idealized agreements, rather than actual ones,
serve as the basis for moral categories.



Another difficulty—even if a given social category is the
product of agreement—is identifying which feature of an
agreement does the “metaphysical labor” in setting up the
category. Suppose we employ a social category at time

t′
 which was a product of an agreement at time

t
. It may be that the features of that category are a product
of the mental states of participants at 
t
, or of the
utterances or acts of participants at 
t
. Or perhaps what
matters is the mental states of community members at

t′
: that is, it is the synchronic trace of the
agreement that sets up the social categories in a community at

t
, not the agreement itself.


4.2.2 Social convention



Convention-based theories are widely proposed for many social
phenomena, including traffic rules, etiquette, laws, language, norms,
institutions, morality, gender, codes of dress, and religion—as
well as geometry, logic, truth, and necessity (see, among many others,
Quine 1936, Lewis 1969, Schiffer 1972, Carter & Patterson 1982,
Gilbert 1983, Kekes 1985, Sugden 1986, Sidelle 1989, Friedman 1995,
Lagerspetz 1995, Young 1996, Bicchieri 2005, Bickhard 2008, Schotter
2008, Marmor 2009, Azzouni 2014, Guala 2016).



To say that a social phenomenon is “conventional”
sometimes means little more than that it is social, or that something
about the phenomenon is arbitrary, or a matter of choice. In social
ontology, however, conventionalist theories are understood more
precisely, following variants of David Lewis’s 1969 analysis of
convention, or else following analyses of convention that challenge
Lewis’s approach.



Lewis argues that conventions are solutions to coordination problems.
In interactive situations that have more than one
equilibrium—for instance, where it is rational for us all to
drive on the left or for us all to drive on the
right—conventions resolve the question of which actions to
choose. In his analysis, convention does not require explicit or tacit
agreement, but instead involves the possession of various attitudes by
members of the community, including beliefs, knowledge, expectations,
and preferences (see the entry on
 
convention
).



Among the critiques of Lewis-style conventionalist theories are: that
many social phenomena do not appear to be solutions to coordination
problems; that they are excessively mentalistic, involving a complex
structure of beliefs, knowledge, expectations, and preferences of the
population; and that they regard conventions as regularities in
behavior having certain characteristics, so the analysis rules out as
conventions anything that is not exemplified in behavioral regularity
(see Burge 1975, Millikan 2005). The critiques, however, are
complicated by the malleability of the notion of convention: it is not
clear whether these should be regarded as difficulties for
conventionalism or for Lewis’ analysis.


4.2.3 Collective attitudes and dispositions



Another prominent set of approaches is closely related to
conventionalism, but instead of appealing to structures of individual
attitudes, these approaches take the social world to be set up by

collective
 attitudes and dispositions. (Some, though not all,
of these accounts go on to analyze collective attitudes in terms of
individual attitudes. See
 
section 5.2
.)



Hart 1961 proposes a sociological basis for certain kinds of
rules—in particular, the rule regarding how valid laws are made
in a society. 
A
 rule 
R
, for Hart, is a rule in a
society if two requirements hold: that members of the society behave
in conformance to 
R
, and that members of the society accept

R
 as a standard of behavior in the society.



Searle 1995, 2010 proposes a theory of those social facts he calls
“institutional facts.” At the center of Searle’s
theory is what he calls a “status function.” Humans,
argues Searle, have the capacity to impose functions onto things in
the world, even if the things do not naturally perform that function.
Things acquire the “status” of performing a function. To
certain pieces of paper, for instance, we impose the status function
of serving as a medium of exchange. What imposes these statuses is
collective attitudes: our collective acceptance or recognition that
they have those statuses. And without exception, argues Searle, status
functions involve the imposition of “deontic
powers”—i.e., rights, permissions, entitlements, duties,
obligations, etc.—to things.



The status functions we impose on objects, and the deontic powers
associated with them, can be expressed in a certain kind of
rule—a “constitutive rule”—and these rules
generally take the form “
X
 counts as 
Y

in 
C
.” (For example: 
a line of stones (X) counts as
having the status of functioning as a border wall (Y) in a village
(C)
. Another example: 
a piece of paper issued by the Bureau
of Engraving and Printing (X) counts as having the status of
functioning as money (Y) in the United States (C)
.) So the way
status functions get assigned, more specifically, is by the collective
acceptance (or recognition) of a constitutive rule. And the process
for putting the rule in place involves a particular kind of speech
act—a declaration. Searle summarizes the picture as
follows: 
“all of human institutional reality is created and
maintained in existence by (representations that have the same logical
form as) Status Function Declarations, including the cases that are
not speech acts in the explicit form of Declarations.”

(Searle 2010, p.  13)



Searle’s approach to the set-up of social facts can be
understood as modifying a Hart-style approach in three ways. First, he
augments Hart’s account of what it takes for members of a
society to accept a rule: it requires collective attitudes, rather
than the individual attitudes proposed by Hart (see
 
5.2

 on collective attitudes). Second, he does not require that rules be
implemented in behavior: institutional facts depend only on mental
states in a society, not on practices. Third, he argues that the
“constitutive rules” for institutional facts all share a
common form and are all put in place by linguistic declarations.
Tuomela (2002) advances a related collective acceptance theory of
social entities.


4.2.4 Other mental states



Other approaches also see social categories as being set up by the
distributed mental states of members of a society. Many of these
theories are less specific about the particular states that
individuals must be in. Husserl 1936, 1950 argues that how an
individual represents an object depends, in part, on the
presupposition that others are representing it as well. Individual
empathy for the representations of others plays a part in how the
individual herself constructs representations. The representations of
objects in a society, therefore, are a product of harmonized mental
states among its members. But these mental states are not required to
be attitudes or dispositions. Other theorists associate different
mental characteristics with structuring social categories. Berger and
Luckmann 1966, for instance, regard the identification of people in a
society with social roles as central to the characteristics of those
roles.


4.3 Pattern Theories



Mentalistic theories of social categories, whether individualistic or
social, are sometimes criticized for overly fictionalizing the social
world. Some philosophers emphasize that social categories are
routinely used in the social sciences: the categories support
inductive inferences, can be assessed statistically, and have causal
effects. Such theorists argue that social categories are “real
kinds” in the world, much like water and gold are “natural
kinds”. Some deny the distinction between social kinds and
natural kinds altogether, even while seeking to retain a role for
people in setting up social categories. Instead of regarding social
kinds to be generated principally by mental states that we overlay on
the world, they treat social kinds as products of patterns—often
patterns of causes and effects—in the world.


4.3.1 Functional roles and realizers



Functionalism in social theory is predominantly an approach to social
explanation, providing causal accounts for the existence and
maintenance of social entities in terms of the functions they serve
for society. Some functionalist theories also make ontological claims,
arguing that the 
nature
 of social entities involves their
functions.



A common theme in functionalism is that people are often unaware of
the functions that their own activities perform. Merton 1957
distinguishes the “latent” functions of an activity from
its “manifest” functions. In many contemporary societies,
for instance, people choose whom to marry on the basis of strong
romantic attachments. One function of this practice is the manifest
function of promoting happy long-term relationships. This motivates
individuals to marry for love. But, Merton argues, the practice also
has an underlying goal (the latent function): to minimize the role of
family in the selection of a mate, thus leading to a kinship structure
with many marriages that join individuals from different communities.
Functionalists, then, often disagree with theories that treat social
phenomena as cognitively transparent to members of a society.



A function may figure into the ontology of a social kind K in any of
several ways. The simplest is for K to be 
defined by
 a causal
role R that its instances perform. In that case, K is a “causal
role kind”. Take, for instance, the role 
serving to minimize
the role of family in selecting a mate
. Alternatively, certain
social categories may better be understood as 
realizers
 of
functional roles. A realizer-kind is often defined in terms of process
or physical characteristics, where things that have those
characteristics normally perform a role (see Block 1980, McLaughlin
2006).



As analyses of social functional kinds, both role-kinds and
realizer-kinds have shortcomings. In particular, they miss out on the
normative character of functions. Cummins 1975 analyzes functions in
terms of the capacities of the components of a system to contribute to
a capacity of a larger system. On his account, the function that an
entity plays is sensitive to the context of the larger system in which
it is embedded. Social kinds, then, may arise from components of
social systems having particular Cummins-functions.


4.3.2 Teleofunctions and tokens



Millikan 1984 proposes a different approach to functional kinds,
arguing that they arise from the successive copying or reproduction of
new objects from older ones. A population of objects copied in the
right way, and copied because they perform a function, form a
“reproductively established family”. Millikan 1999, 2005
applies this account to linguistic and social kinds as well as
biological ones. Millikan also analyzes social convention in terms of
reproductively established families, and other theorists have recently
applied her theory to artifacts (see
 
section 5.5
).



A significant contribution of Millikan’s approach is the
constitutive role of particular tokens in the world in setting up the
kinds of which they are members. In her approach, the kind

marriage
 is partly set up by millions of particular marriages
copied one from another in a reproductively established family.
Particular marriages—the actual members of the kind—figure
into setting up the kind 
marriage
 to have the membership
conditions it does. Contrast this with a mentalistic account of the
kind 
marriage
. According to that sort of theory, particular
marriages are members of the kind, and may play a causal role in
triggering people to have certain attitudes. But it is the attitudes
that define the kind; the tokens do not play an ontological role. Thus
Millikan proposes a more “world-involving” and less
mentalistic theory of how kinds are set up. Also see Burge 1986 for a
similar insight.


4.3.3 Causal loops



Systems theorists in the 1940s and 1950s began to investigate feedback
mechanisms of regulation and control, such as electronic circuits that
loop their outputs back into their inputs in order to arrive at a
stable equilibrium. Wiener 1948, 1950 applies this
“cybernetics” to social systems, as do Mead et al.
1950–1956, Parsons 1951, Ashby 1956. Bateson 1972 elaborates
these applications, describing social systems as involving
homeostasis, i.e., mechanisms that self-correct to stabilize their
properties.



Boyd 1999a applies homeostasis to the analysis of kinds, both natural
and social. According to Boyd, kinds are clusters of entities that
stably have similar properties, with these similarities sustained by a
causal homeostatic mechanism. Marriage, for instance, is a kind
because there are many particular entities with similar properties
(such as being formed by ceremonies, involving couples paired up, and
so on), and because there are mechanisms causing entities to have and
keep these properties. Like Millikan, Boyd argues that kinds are a
product of actual tokens in the world and the causal processes in
which those tokens are involved. Since his account involves actual
causal patterns over time, kinds are historical, but they do not need
to involve functional roles or evolution. (See Bach 2022 on
similarities between the approaches of Boyd and Millikan regarding
social kinds.)



Hacking 1995 employs feedback mechanisms in a different way: rather
than emphasizing stability, he regards causal change to be
characteristic of “human kinds”. Hacking argues that human
kinds are generated through histories of causal loops, in which
objects having a cluster of properties are named as being members of a
kind. That label then affects the property cluster that they have,
which changes the classification, and so on repeatedly, with human
interests changing the properties that get classified into the
category. Hacking discusses the example of the kind 
refugee
,
in which categorizing people as refugees changes how they are treated,
which then loops back to affect how we categorize refugees. In
Hacking’s account, each loop includes a mentalistic
aspect—the classification—and an instantiated
aspect—the causal effects on the properties. Butler 1993 and
Hayles 1999 develop accounts of the looping effects of classification
systems on human bodies (see also Schilling 2001). Mallon 2003, 2016
combines the looping theories with homeostatic property clusters, and
applies them to social kinds, races in particular; see also Tsou
2020.


4.4 Theories of Practice



A different large class of theories hold that practical engagement
with the environment is the basis for the setup of social categories.
Many of these theories are influenced by Heidegger 1927, Merleau-Ponty
1945, and Wittgenstein 1953. And still other theories are pluralistic
and heterogeneous: they hold that social categories are not just set
up in one uniform way, but in a variety of distinct ways.



Theories of practice were discussed in
 
section 3.4.2
,
 as theories of the constituents or parts of social phenomena. Dances,
for instance, involve physical and mental routines: among the
constituents of a foxtrot are people’s thoughts and actions on
the dance floor. However, theories of practice are not so easily
categorized. Particular tokens of dance routines might be understood
as playing a dual role: not only are they the constituents of
foxtrots, but they also are among the sources of the category foxtrot.
In this respect, theories of practice share an insight with certain
“pattern” theories (see sections
 
4.3.2

 and
 
4.3.3
):
 the tokens of the practices themselves do some of the work in
structuring the social categories into which the practices fall.
Giddens 1984 gives an account of what he calls
“structuration”, the process by which social structures
are dynamically generated by practices and also condition them.
Sahlins 1981, 1985 describes the formation of cultural categories
through collisions between cultures and the actions of individuals.
Other theories as well, such as Foucault 1976, 1977a and Geertz 1973
can also be understood as giving accounts of how practices set up
social categories.



Because practices are so general and play so many roles in these
theories, it is a challenge to interpret them from the perspective of
social ontology. It is hard to tease apart different kinds of
ontological claims they make, and also hard even to know when these
theories are making an ontological claim, as opposed merely to telling
a narrative of causal influence. Some theories of practice insist on
the importance of material routines in the world, and yet return to
mentalistic-sounding accounts of the conceptual creation of the social
world. The centerpiece of Bourdieu 1972 [1977], for instance, is the
claim that social practice is generated by a
“habitus”—a mentally internalized system of
discrimination and perception, embodied as dispositions. (See also
Ortner 1984, Haslanger 2016b).


4.5 Pluralistic and Heterogeneous Theories



As seen in the “pattern theories” discussed in
 
section 4.3
,
 approaches to biological and other scientific kinds are sometimes
extended to social categories. Some participants in these debates,
including Dupré 1995 and Hacking 2007, argue for a sweeping
pluralism about scientific kinds: they contend that there are myriad
kinds of kinds, and that it is an error to regard some kinds as more
“natural” than others. Others argue for a more modest form
of pluralism. Ereshefsky and Reydon 2015 argue that there are several
distinct kinds of scientific kinds, including non-causal kinds,
functional kinds, and heterostatic kinds. Along similar lines, many
theorists of race argue for pluralism with respect to racial kinds:
though contemporary race theorists deny “biological
essentialism”, they argue that there are many ways racial kinds
are constructed and used in contemporary societies (see
 
section 5.4
).



Epstein 2014a argues for modest pluralism about the ways social
categories are set up. He introduces the term ‘anchoring’
to denote the setting up or putting in place of social categories or
kinds. He proposes that all the theories discussed in
 
section 4

 are theories of anchoring, but denies that social categories are all
anchored in the same way. Instead, there are various “anchoring
schemas”. He cautions that we sometimes classify kinds according
to how they are anchored, but not in all cases.



In addition to pluralism about anchoring schemas, he also argues that
anchors are heterogeneous: even for a single anchoring schema, the
anchors that feed into that schema—i.e., the facts that
metaphysically set up a social category—are often diverse. Legal
categories in the U.S., for instance, are anchored by facts such as
jury instructions, trial results, legislative enactments, judicial
interpretation, and environmental regularities. Even theories of
practice, he argues, do not have the resources to accommodate this
heterogeneity.


4.6 The Roles of Language



Many theories in social ontology assign a central role to language. In
considering the relation between language and sociality, we should
separate the following questions:




Regarding the social nature of language: Is language private or
public, mental or social or environmental? This is discussed in
 
section 5.7
.


Regarding linguistic entities as constituents of social facts: Do
certain social facts have linguistic components or building blocks?
For instance, a speech act may be a component of an instance of a
hate-crime. This is discussed in
 
section 3.3.2
.


Regarding roles for language in setting up social categories: Is
our language part of the metaphysical explanation for why we have the
social categories we do, such as dollar, woman, or professor? This is
the topic of the present section.





Answers to this third question can, in turn, be divided into two broad
kinds of role for language: (a) social categories correspond to
semantic values, or meanings, of words; (b) social categories are set
up by speech acts, discourse, or other features of a community’s
language.


4.6.1 Social ontology as a matter of semantics



‘Foxtrot’ is a word in the English language. In some
semantic theories, the meaning of that word just is the social kind

foxtrot
: the semantic value of the word is identical with the
social category. This may or may not imply that language plays a key
role in social ontology. On a direct-reference theory of meaning (see
Soames 1987, Kaplan 1989, Recanati 1993), it does not. That theory
argues that we encounter the kind 
foxtrot
 in the
world—a kind that is presumably socially constructed—and
then connect the word ‘foxtrot’ to that kind. The
inclusion of that word in our language does not have any metaphysical
bearing on the category.



The same may apply even if the name has causal influence on the
category 
foxtrot
. Hacking 1995 argues that the term we apply
to a category has an influence on our practices, which in turn changes
the category. Even in this account, it is not clear that language has
a metaphysical bearing on the category: the practices ontologically
determine the contours of the category, and the uses of the word are
merely one among many causal influences on those practices.



A number of philosophers argue that many debates in social metaphysics
are “verbal disputes”, i.e., debates over terminology. And
they further argue that verbal disputes are not substantive, in the
sense that how they are resolved does not really have to do with the
way things are in the world, but rather just with the linguistic
labels we use for social categories (McGrath 2008, Chalmers 2011,
Jenkins 2014, Barnes 2014, Ludwig 2015). Díaz-León 2022
argues against this distinction, holding that merely because a debate
is verbal does not exclude it from being metaphysically
substantive.



Whether or not some questions in social metaphysics really are
semantic ones, there are grounds for thinking that at least some
debates are not semantic. In particular, sociologists often discover
social categories that have not been previously named, spoken of, or
even conceptualized. This suggests that at least some of the
metaphysics of the social world is not about linguistic labels.


4.6.2 Social categories set up by speech acts, discourse, features of language



Austin 1961, 1962 points out that language is not only reserved for
describing states of affairs in the world. Certain utterances are
“performative”: merely in uttering them, we establish
facts in the world. A minister, for instance, marries a couple with an
invocation. Searle 1995, 2010 argues that all “institutional
facts” are generated in this way. Every constitutive rule, he
argues, is a product of a declarative speech act, although he
qualifies this by holding that some declarations may be replaced with
attitudes that have the same function (Searle 2010). He expresses
skepticism that, in such acts, we genuinely create new entities in the
world, rather than merely taking attitudes towards “brute
reality” (cf. Sider 2001, Effingham 2010). Thomasson 2003 argues
on the contrary for the reality of entities generated with speech acts
(cf. Wiggins 1980, Schiffer 2003).



Several theorists argue not just that particular social entities are
produced by speech acts, but that the social world is the product of
discourse more generally. This view has many historical antecedents in
the enlightenment and post-enlightenment (Aarsleff 1982, Ricken 1994,
and Forster 2010), as well as in the early twentieth century, such as
Cassirer 1925 and Whorf 1944. But Wittgenstein 1953 is generally
credited with crystallizing this “linguistic turn”. Winch
1958 draws on Wittgenstein to argue that “our language and our
social relations are just two different sides of the same coin”.
Social phenomena and their meanings, according to Winch, are
manifestations of the “form of life” in which a
society’s language-games are a part. This perspective has been
influential in post-structuralism in particular, with a wide range of
theories advocating the linguistic construction of social reality.
Included among these are Foucault’s discourse analysis (Foucault
1984, 2001) and Butler (1988)’s treatment of the performativity
of gender, with the speech acts that would appear to express gender
actually being constitutive of gender identities. See Tannen, Hamilton
et al. 2015.



Recent theories in post-structuralism have begun to de-emphasize
language, partly as a result of critiques that such theories focus too
little on human bodies and physical experience. The notion of
“discourse” is also often expanded to include practical
activities in the world (such as the “architectural
discourse” of constructed spaces). Theories of discourse,
construed in this way, are difficult to distinguish from more general
theories of practice and heterogeneous theories.


5. Key Domains Addressed by Social Ontology



The preceding sections discuss general theories of social ontology.
Informing these—and informed by them—is work on specific
applications. The following sections briefly discuss prominent domains
in social ontology to give a sense of the variety of these
applications, to introduce some key topics, and to point to resources
for further reading. Corresponding to each these sections is an entire
subfield of philosophy and/or social science.


5.1 Social Groups



What are social groups? One debate in the literature concerns the kind
of entities that social groups are: collections, classes, sets,
fusions, structures, or some other kind of entity. It may seem natural
to think of a group as a set of people in the mathematical sense.
However, groups can persist through changes in membership, while sets
are generally understood as having their members essentially (see
Sharvy 1968, Ruben 1985, Uzquiano 2004, Sheehy 2006). Effingham 2010
proposes an account that identifies groups with complex sets, so that
they can have different members at different times and at different
worlds. Others (including Macdonald & Pettit 1981, Copp 1984,
Sheehy 2006) argue that groups are mereological fusions of people. A
problem with this is the transitivity of parthood: since Alice’s
finger is a part of Alice, it follows from the fusion view that if
Alice is a part of a group, then so is Alice’s finger. That is a
problem, because while Alice is a member of the group her finger is
not. These views also need to meet the challenge that there can
distinct “coinciding” groups, i.e., groups that have the
same members. (Gilbert 1989, 1996 and Uzquiano 2004 argue that there
can be distinct groups whose members coincide for their entire
duration; Epstein 2019a argues that there can be distinct groups whose
members 
necessarily
 coincide for their entire duration.)
Hawley 2017 defends the mereological view against these and other
criticisms, and Strohmaier 2018 adds a condition to account for which
parts are group members. López de Sa 2007, Korman 2015, and
Horden and López de Sa 2021 argue that groups are simply
pluralities of individuals, and Wilhelm 2020, 2022 argues that groups
are fusions of pluralities. Richardson 2022 argues for a different
response to the coincidence objection.



Another view is that groups are distinct from their material. Ritchie
(2013, 2015, 2018, 2020) argues that groups are realizations of
structures (see also Schmitt 2003a). Others argue that groups are
distinct from their members but are constituted by them (Uzquiano
2004, Jansen 2009, Harris 2020). Fine 2020 builds on his theory of
“embodiments” to develop a hylomorphic theory of groups,
and Uzquiano 2020 develops a separate theory according to which groups
are “plural embodiments.”



Different approaches to groups make different commitments with regard
to the entities that should be included among the social
groups—e.g., committees, teams, corporations, universities,
nations, races, genders, red-haired people. Some theorists also
propose that social groups must have certain distinctive
characteristics, such as the members being in certain cognitive states
or being subject to certain norms. Related to this is the question of
whether there are distinct types of groups. Ritchie 2015 argues that
there are two prominent types—
organized groups
, which
are realizations of structured sets of nodes that stand in a
functional relation to one another, and 
feature groups
, which
are collections of people who have a property or feature in common
with one another. Thomasson 2019 argues that an important way of
characterizing groups is in terms of the norms they bear. Epstein
2019a challenges simple typologies of groups and proposes a framework
for the metaphysics of groups involving multiple dimensions.


5.2 Group Minds, Collective Intentionality, and Group Agency



Can groups take actions? Can they have intentions or beliefs? Can they
bear responsibility? If so, how are these to be understood? Through
much of the twentieth century ascriptions of intentions and actions to
groups were widely regarded as either erroneous or else merely
“summative”: that is, for a group to have an intention or
take an action is merely for all the members of the group to have that
intention or take that action (see Tollefsen 2015).



Schweikard and Schmid (see entry on
 
collective intentionality
)
 find more nuanced approaches in Scheler 1913 and Walther 1923.
Scheler identifies various kinds of social entities, some of which
involve people acting in solidarity, and Walther proposes an account
of structured attitudes in terms of empathy. In the recent literature,
Gilbert 1989, 1990 introduces new reasons for denying summative
approaches: members of social groups are subject to norms that do not
apply merely to individuals who have matching attitudes. If a couple
is walking together to the store, one person violates a norm if she
suddenly takes off in a different direction without excusing herself.
But this would not violate any norms if collective intentions were
merely summative. Gilbert argues that social groups, as opposed to
mere collections of individuals, are formed by the members making
joint commitments. She describes the formation of such commitments,
and analyzes group attitudes in terms of them.



Bratman 1993, 2014 is more concerned with demystifying shared
intentions by explaining how they can arise from individual attitudes.
Instead of searching for a general analysis, he proposes sufficient
conditions for the formation of shared intention, as applied to the
case of “modestly social” groups. These are small,
unstructured groups of people, in which all members participate
knowledgably in coordination with one another. Bratman analyzes shared
intention in terms of the common knowledge of group members, together
with “meshing” intentions by group members to perform an
action by way of the actions and plans of the other members. Bratman
argues that the norms Gilbert observes can be derived from these
interpersonal intentions together with standard moral obligations.



Tuomela and Miller 1988 and Searle 1990 account for group intention
differently. Following Sellars (1968, 1980), they propose that there
is an overlooked class of attitudes that individual people possess: in
addition to “I-attitudes”, individuals also have
“we-attitudes”. According to Searle, these are distinct
primitive mental states. For a group to collectively intend J,
according to Searle, is for all the members of the group to we-intend
J. His view is somewhat similar to a “summative” view of
group attitudes, except that collective attitudes are sums of
we-attitudes rather than I-attitudes. Tuomela and Miller also
distinguish attitudes in the “we-mode” from attitudes in
the “I-mode”. The most unified form of group attitude, in
their view, is made up of the members having we-mode attitudes. But
for Tuomela and Miller, we-mode attitudes are not primitive, but are
built out of more standard attitudes. They also admit different
species of group attitudes, some of which are built of I-mode
attitudes of group members, much like Bratman does. In recent years,
psychologists and cognitive scientists have begun to investigate
whether there are distinctively social attitudes (see Knoblich,
Butterfill et al. 2011, Gallotti & Frith 2013, Tomasello 2014).
Schmid 2023 argues that we-attitudes are attitudes of plural
intentional subjects: just as there are individual subjects, there are
plural subjects, and just as individuals have intentional attitudes,
so do plural subjects.



In addition to collective intentions, other philosophers have worked
on the analysis of many other attitudes, features, and activities of
groups. (Analyses of “collective” and “shared”
attitudes tend to stress collaboration and sharedness, while at least
certain analyses of “group” attitudes include
heterogeneous groups with members that are at odds with one another.
And analyses of “joint” attitudes tend to focus on
psychological interactions of pairs of individuals. But these
distinctions are loose, and often elided in the literature.)



The literature on group belief addresses whether it is the sum of
beliefs of group members, or else a matter of acceptance by group
members, or if more is required, such as commitment or integration
with other group attitudes. It also examines what it takes for group
belief to be justified. (See Gilbert 1987, Wray 2001, Tollefsen 2002,
McMahon 2003, Hakli 2006, List 2014, Lackey 2020, 2021, Backes 2021,
de Ridder 2022.) Group knowledge is largely discussed in the
literature on collective epistemology, see Lackey 2014, Brady and
Fricker 2016. There is also increasing discussion of whether groups or
collective agents can have emotions and/or reactive attitudes (see,
for instance, von Scheve and Salmela 2014, Björnsson and Hess
2017, Thonhauser 2022).



Collective judgment and reasoning are by now large fields of inquiry;
see entry on
 
social choice theory

 and entry on
 
belief merging and judgment aggregation
.
 Similarly, there are many literatures on joint action and collective
action. (Again, the terms “group,”
“collective,” and “joint” are sometimes used
interchangeably, sometimes not. Joint action, for instance, tends to
be discussed in connection with cognitive psychology and the
psychological states of pairs or small groups of individuals engaged
in interactive activities, while collective action is often understood
as larger in scale.)



Collective responsibility is also the topic of a burgeoning
literature. Questions of whether groups can bear responsibility for
their actions are closely tied to accounts of what it is for a group
to take an action, as well as whether and how groups possess
attitudes. See Jaspers 1961; Held 1970; French 1984, 1998; Arendt
1987; May 1992; Smiley 1992; Moody-Adams 1994; Gilbert 2000;
Schwenkenbecher 2013; Collins 2019, 2023; entry on
 
collective responsibility
.



The analysis of collective attitudes raises questions about the nature
of group minds more generally, and whether or not they are to be
understood as extensions of individual properties applied to groups. A
number of theorists take a functionalist approach to group minds and
agency. On this approach, group agents or group cognitive systems are
understood to function in a similar way as individuals do, at a
certain level of description. A widely accepted theory of individual
agency is that people have a modular system that we use to navigate
the world. We have beliefs, knowledge, form intentions, plan, reason,
and take action. All of these components can be described in terms of
their functional contributions to the system, and they integrate with
one another to perform unified functions. They compose, in other
words, a “system of practical activity”. Group agency is
understood on this model: for group agents, the same functional system
is realized, but by groups or distributed systems rather than by
individuals. (See Bratman 1987, 1993, 2014; List & Pettit 2011;
Theiner & O’Connor 2010; Theiner 2014; Epstein 2022). List
and Pettit argue that such realizers constitute new “loci of
agency”, or “groups with minds of their own” (see
also Ludwig 2016, 2017; Townsend 2020).



Others challenge group minds by arguing against functional treatments
of mind altogether. Rupert 2014, for instance, argues that having
phenomenal states is a requirement for intentionality, but that groups
cannot have such states (see also Schwitzgebel 2015, List 2018). Other
theorists object to the typical focus of this literature on small
unstructured collectives of adults interacting with one another. They
instead work on the attitudes of complex groups, corporations, and
large-scale systems (Hutchins 1995, Huebner 2013). Questions of moral
agency and corporate responsibility may also bear on how to analyze
group agency and group minds (see French 1979, Tollefsen 2002, Pettit
2007, Hess 2010, List & Pettit 2011, Baddorf 2017).


5.3 Institutions, Organizations, and Firms



The nature of institutions, organizations, and firms is treated more
extensively in sociology and economics than in philosophy. Coase 1937,
1960 pioneered the literature on firms in economics. In “The
Nature of the Firm”, Coase examines the question of why firms
exist at all: he argues that the function of firms is to lower
transaction costs that would otherwise have to be incurred in forming
contracts among individuals. Coase does not distinguish the question
of the function of firms from the question of what firms are. But
subsequent work engages more directly with ontological questions,
including eliminativism about firms (Alchian & Demsetz 1972), the
“nexus of contracts” view (Jensen & Meckling 1976),
the “property rights” view (Grossman & Hart 1986, Hart
& Moore 1990), and the “resource view” (Penrose 1959,
Barney 1991, Conner & Prahalad 1996). It is generally seen as a
requirement on theories of the firm that they explain not only why
firms exist, but also that they account for the boundaries of firms
and their internal organization, as well as explaining why they are
better at “rent creation” than markets (Kraaijenbrink et
al. 2010).



Work on firms is also tied to theories of in institutions in
economics, spearheaded by Oliver Williamson, Douglas North, and Elinor
Ostrom. Williamson 1979, 1981, 1996 popularized a Coase-style approach
with theories of how institutional structures such as markets,
hierarchies, multidivisional corporations, and alliances solve
problems of transaction costs. Ostrom’s influential work on
common pool resources treats institutions as sets of rules that
communities put in place in order to change incentives and to induce
socially beneficial choices. The “new institutional
economics” program develops this largely game-theoretic
understanding of institutions, tying them to analyses of the nature of
conventions and norms (see Shepsle 1986; Sugden 1986; North 1990;
Ostrom 1990, 1995; Binmore 1998; Schotter 2008; Guala 2016; Guala and
Hindriks 2020; Jupille and Caporaso 2022).



Recent work in organizational sociology also focuses on systems of
rules, with organizations analyzed in terms of their
“institutionalized” features. Rather than the explicitly
chosen rules discussed by economists, however, here systems of rules
are regarded as tacit and non-intentionally followed (Powell &
DiMaggio 2012). Sociological approaches have been developed for
interpreting organizations, largely focused on causal explanations for
their structure, power, and influence. Work on the nature of
organizations in sociology often involves analyzing them in terms of
social components or properties (see Clegg, Hardy et al. 1996, Scott
2014).


5.4 Race, Gender, and Disability



Much recent interest in social ontology has been sparked by new
approaches to race, gender, disability, and related social categories.
Historically, erroneous ontological claims have contributed to and
been used to justify social oppression. Claims about the genetic
nature of race, for instance, are historically tied to claims about
intellectual, character, and cultural differences between racial
groups. Likewise, claims about the nature of gender differences are
historically tied to claims about how members of certain groups (e.g.,
women, men) ought to behave.



Early critical work on race and gender was largely focused on
criticizing “biological essentialism” about these
categories—e.g., the view that races have simple, natural, and
heritable biological properties, such that every member of a racial
group has that biological property. This should not be confused with a
metaphysical claim that might be made by a social constructivist
proposing a “social essence” of race or gender: for
instance, a claim that membership in a racial group essentially
involves identifying with other people for reasons of solidarity, or
that it involves being descended from a historically and
geographically situated population. Such a theorist would flatly deny
“essentialism” in the old sense, which still analyzing the
(social and/or socially set up) essential properties of the social
category (see Phillips 2010 on senses of essentialism regarding social
kinds).



In recent decades, a large variety of approaches to the ontology of
race have been developed (see entry on
 
race
,
 section 2). Among the views are skepticism about race, varieties of
social constructivism about race, and new versions of biological
naturalism. Skeptics argue that biological essentialism in the old
sense is inseparable from our racial categories, so debunking racist
views implies that racial categories are an illusion: there are no
races (Appiah 1985, 1994; Zack 1994, 1995). Constructivists maintain
that races are social kinds without having simple biological essences.
Among these are historico-geographic theories, genetic-bundle
theories, identity theories, politico-cultural theories, etc. (see
Taylor 2000, Bernasconi & Lott 2000, Zack 2002, Glasgow 2009,
Jeffers 2013, 2019; Haslanger 2019). Naturalists hold that although
simple biological theories are false, racial differences can be
identified using the methods of population biology (Andreasen 1998,
Kitcher 2007, Hardimon 2012; see also Kaplan & Winther 2014,
Spencer 2019). In the face of competing conceptions of race, some
theorists propose pluralism about race-like kinds (Hochman 2013,
McPherson 2015). In many theories of race, bi-racialism and
multi-racialism have been treated as boundary or marginal cases.
Others argue, on the contrary, that multiracialism is central to the
construction of racial categories (see Alcoff, Sundstrom et al.
2016).



These theories raise interesting questions for social ontology more
generally. In what cases is it warranted to be skeptical about the
existence of kinds? What are the implications of a discovery that
historical assumptions about kinds are mistaken, or are morally wrong?
To what extent can we make sense of, or defend, pluralism about the
nature of kinds, and to what extent is pluralism to be resisted?
Especially with regard to politically important kinds, is it possible
to give a purely descriptive account of their nature, or does a
correct account of the ontology of kinds necessarily involve normative
considerations? And another challenging question is whether theories
ought to more sharply distinguish the constituents or building blocks
of racial kinds from the sources or construction of those kinds (that
is, corresponding to
 
section 3

 and
 
section 4

 above).



In some ways, questions pertaining to the metaphysics of sex and
gender resemble those pertaining to race: historically, descriptive
and normative categories were conflated in simplistic biological
theories (Gould 1973–4). An important difference between
sex/gender and race, however, concerns the distinction between sex and
gender (Beauvoir 1949, West & Zimmerman 1987). Many theorists
propose that sexes are biological categories and that genders are
categories of social norms and behaviors that are traditionally
attached to sexes. However, other theorists argue that it is incorrect
to regard sex as biological (Fausto-Sterling 2000, Butler 2004). Thus
in the case of sex/gender, there are arguably multiple socially
constructed categories that interact with one another; and some
theorists reject the distinction between sex and gender (see entry on
 
feminist perspectives on sex and gender
,
 entry on
 
feminist metaphysics
,
 and entry on
 
feminist perspectives on trans issues
).



A question pertaining to racial and gender categories alike is whether
these are descriptively adequate categories in the first place. Many
of the political phenomena associated with differential treatment of
groups and oppression cut across lines of race, gender, and class.
Some theorists of intersectionality argue that it is misleading to
regard standard gender and racial groups as if they were unified (see
Crenshaw 1991, McCall 2005, Jones 2014, Bernstein 2020).



A central problem in the ontology of race, gender, and other
categories is that how we categorize not only has ethical
implications, but is affected by ethically-laden facts. Some theorists
challenge the idea of a purely descriptive analysis of such groups.
Others propose that there can be descriptive analyses, but that such
analyses are a stepping stone to ethically preferable categories.
Haslanger 2000, 2012, Jenkins 2016, 2023 and Dembroff 2016 argue for
the “ameliorative” analysis of gender categories. Part of
the role of social ontology, on these views, is to analyze the
concepts and categories that are “operative” in a social
system, but an equally important aim is to explore how we might
otherwise construct social categories with the aim of social
improvement (see entry on
 
feminist philosophy of language
,
 section 2.3). Barnes 2016 argues for an ameliorative account of
disability (see entry on
 
disability: definitions, models, experience
).


5.5 Artifacts and Artworks



The term ‘artifact’ denotes a broad class of objects that
are products of human activity. The paradigmatic examples are tools,
such as wheels, knives, and cups, but the category of artifacts
includes more complex objects as well, such as cars, houses, and
computers. Some theorists conceive of artifacts broadly enough that
the category includes nearly all social entities, from hammers to
Hamlet.



The standard rough characterization of an artifact is that it is an
object created for some purpose, or to perform some function (see
Hilpinen 1992a, Dipert 1993; entry on
 
artifact
).
 The simplest version is that something is an artifact just in case it
is made by an individual having the intention that it perform some
particular function. To be an artifact, on this characterization, does
not require that it actually perform the function: something can be a
chair, for instance, even if it is no good for sitting on. Similarly,
just because something performs a function does not mean that it is an
artifact, on this account: a rock might function as a hammer, or as a
paperweight, without its being an artifact.



Every aspect of this characterization is contested in the literature.
Are intentions necessary? Are they sufficient? Do they need to be
intentions regarding functions, or can they be other kinds of
intentions? Will other mental states do, and can there even be
artifacts that do not involve mental states? Do artifacts depend on
the intentions (or other mental states) of individuals, or can their
mind-dependence be social? Do they need to be made, or can they be
found? Do they need to perform functions? Do these
requirements—whatever they turn out to be—apply to tokens
of artifactual kinds, or are they somehow characteristic of
artifactual kinds without being requirements on the tokens?



Koslicki 2018, Ch. 8 provides a useful overview of recent alternatives
to these questions and their challenges. She divides them into views
that formulate artifact-essences in terms of (i) maker’s
intentions (e.g., Thomasson 2003, 2007), (ii) creative acts (e.g.,
Evnine 2016), and (iii) primary intended functions (e.g., Baker 2004,
2007; Millikan 1984; Elder 2007); and then contrasts these with
anti-essentialist approaches (e.g., Sidelle 2009, Sullivan 2017,
Waters 2017). We might also add theories that regard the intentions of
the user, rather than of the maker, as central (e.g., Keil, Greif et
al. 2007; Preston 2009, 2013). A good deal of recent literature
continues inquiry into intentional and functional essences of
artifacts, including the articles in Franssen, Kroes et al. 2014, Bahr
et al. 2019, as well as Eaton 2020, Irmak 2021, and Juvshik 2021.



In sorting through these alternatives, it is useful to distinguish
what is claimed about the “building” relations in question
(see
 
section 2.2
),
 especially claims of ontological dependence versus ontological
determination of artifact-kinds and artifact-instances. An
under-explored topic is the sources or social construction of
artifact-kinds (along the lines of
 
Section 4

 of this entry), though see Goehr 1992 on historicism and musical
kinds.



Theories of artifacts draw from the literature on the ontology of art
(see, for instance, Bloom 1996, Levinson 2007, Mag Uidhir 2013), and
from the literature on technology and tools (see Arthur 2009, Kroes
2012). Many theories of artworks regard them to be kinds of artifacts
(see Eaton 1969, Iseminger 1973, Hilpinen 1992b, Thomasson 1999).
Problems in the ontology of art include the ontological categories
into which artworks fall, the unity or diversity of kinds of entities
within artistic domains and across domains (e.g., in painting,
sculpture, music, dance), the individuation of particular artworks,
the definition of art in general, and the dynamic changes in artistic
categories. See entries on the
 
definition of art
,
 
history of the ontology of art
,
 
the philosophy of music
,
 
the philosophy of dance
,
 
conceptual art
,
 and
 
the philosophy of digital art
,
 and
 
the philosophy of technology
.



Theories of artifacts are also being applied to a number of other
domains in social ontology. There are growing literatures, for
example, on laws and legal systems as artifacts (see
 
section 5.7

 below), and software and programming languages as artifacts (Irmak
2012, Turner 2014).


5.6 Money



Menger 1892 tells a story of the emergence of money from trading
practices. For a society to come to have money, Menger argues, it is
not required that anyone in the society made a choice to adopt a
medium as money. Instead, in the course of transactions in the
marketplace, the marketability of certain goods will tend to increase,
and as a result, these goods acquire a degree of
“money-character”. Money, in Menger’s view, is
simply a good that is highly marketable in transactions, and therefore
highly liquid.



The centerpiece of Menger’s account is the non-intentional
emergence of money (see Aydinonat 2008, Tieffenbach 2010). But his
account also gives an implicit theory of the nature of money. Money is
a simple causal-role kind, with any good that is highly liquid and
marketable being money. Introductory economics textbooks tend to
define money as a slightly more complicated role-kind: money is a
store of value, a medium of exchange, and a unit of account (Arnold
2008, Mankiw 2016). Recent work in economics suggests a different set
of functions for money. A striking feature of standard economic models
is that money seems superfluous. In idealized neo-classical economies,
there is no need for a medium of exchange, nor is it clear why price
levels should affect the “real economy” of production and
consumption. Thus economists have recently investigated the economic
“frictions” that make money useful, and find that money
contributes to efficiency in a market that has imperfect
enforceability of contracts and limited record-keeping. In such an
economy, money helps perform operations such as the search for trading
partners. The overcoming of such economic “frictions”
seems to be an alternative and perhaps underlying function of money.
(See Diamond 1984, Kiyotaki & Wright 1989, Kocherlakota 1998,
Wright 2010, Smit, Buekens et al. 2016.)



These discussions imply that money is a causal-role kind of some sort.
This is questionable, however: such a definition fails to accommodate
tokens of money that fail to perform those roles (such as a coin
buried in the ground). Instead, money may be better understood as a
different sort of functional kind, or perhaps as an artifactual kind
(see
 
section 5.5
).
 Alternatively, the nature of money may not involve its functions at
all. Aristotle (
Politics
 1.8–10) notes that there are
several distinct functions performed by money, each of which would
naturally have its own essence; but he points out that we use the same
medium for all of these. The money in any given society, he argues, is
a product of agreement in that society.



A story is sometimes told of a historical progression from barter to
the use of “commodity money” (such as gold, cowrie shells,
or beads) to the use of “fiat money” (such as
government-issued paper currency) (see Searle 1995, McEachern 2011).
Searle argues that all kinds of money are “institutional
kinds”, which he analyzes in terms of the collective assignment
of a function to a substrate. Commodity money, in his view, involves
assignment to a good with some intrinsic value, while fiat money
involves assignment to a piece of paper printed by the government. A
number of recent discussions of the metaphysics of money debate the
centrality of collective belief or acceptance to money (for
challenges, see Maki 2020, Guala 2020; for defenses, see Papadapoulos
2015, Vooys and Dick 2019. See also Brynjarsdottir 2018, Sandberg and
Hindriks 2020, entry on
 
philosophy of money and finance
).



Historians of money and monetary theorists divide kinds of money along
more nuanced dimensions. A few historical cases may qualify as fiat
money, such as in Ming dynasty China, revolutionary France, and the
American Confederacy, but these were fragile and subject to collapse
(Yang 1952, Ferguson 2008, Spang 2015). But many contemporary
approaches emphasize the role of private interactions in the creation
of money, and importantly, reserve banking as well as credit and debt
markets (see Desan 2014). Other theories emphasize the role of the
state, and in particular the central roles of interest-rate-setting
institutions, government debt, and the collection of taxes (see
Friedman & Schwartz 1963, Kaldor 1985, Moore 1988, Deleplace &
Nell 1996). In these approaches, questions about the
“substance” of money become rather peripheral.



Some controversies persist on the substance of money. It was part of
historical debates over the gold standard and
“bimetallism”, and more recently there has been
philosophical discussion of electronic money (Smith & Searle 2003)
and “cryptocurrencies” such as bitcoin (see Passinsky
2021; Bailey et al., 2021).


5.7 The Law



Many important questions in social ontology are connected to
jurisprudence, or the study of the nature of law itself. Consider a
given legal obligation or prohibition in a locality, such as a U.S.
federal law on reporting requirements for public corporations, or a
state law governing medical reimbursements. Lawyers and judges mainly
work on specific applications of such laws, such as whether a
particular corporation satisfying a particular reporting requirement.
In certain circumstances lawyers and judges investigate and interpret
the content of the law, such as whether some provision is incompatible
with the Constitution.



The study of the nature of law is distinct from these. It can be
divided into two principal inquiries, corresponding to the division
between the “constituents” and “sources”
discussed in sections
 
3

 and
 
4
.
 The first inquiry examines what determines or grounds the content of
laws in general, within a legal system. For instance, is the content
of a law exhaustively determined by the statutes recorded in the legal
code? Or is that only a part of what determines the content of a law?
Other candidate contributors to the content of a law are historical
judicial interpretations, jury decisions, patterns of practices,
legislative actions and intentions, executive statements, general
legal principles, and moral principles. Hart (1961) casts this
question as the inquiry into the “rule of recognition” in
a legal system: that is, what conditions a proposition needs to
satisfy in order for it to be a law (see also Dworkin 1967, 1978,
1986; Greenawalt 1986; Shapiro 2007, 2009).



A second question is: What are the sources of these contributors to
the content of the law? In virtue of what do texts or enactments or
interpretations or moral considerations figure into grounding the
content of a nation’s laws? Positivist theories hold that social
practices and other sociological facts are the sources of legality;
anti-positivist theories argue instead that legality is rooted, at
least in part, in morality, and that legal standards are independent
of human decision and practice. A central problem for any theory of
the sources of law is the authority, or bindingness, which law carries
(if it does carry these). See the articles in J.L. Coleman, Shapiro,
& Himma 2002, as well as entries on the
 
nature of law
,
 
natural law theories
,
 
legal positivism
,
 and
 
the economic analysis of law
.



In the last few years, a number of theorists have begun to approach
these problems as inquiries into the “grounding” or
“ontological determination” of law. These theories aim to
develop a better understanding of the making of law, as well as the
nature of legal normativity, and to clarify the debates over
positivism and anti-positivism. See Greenberg 2014; Epstein 2015 Ch.
7, Plunkett 2012; Chilovi and Pavlakos 2019, 2022; Chilovi 2020.



Others in the last few years have worked to understand law in terms of
other social ontological categories. Shapiro 2011 draws on
Bratman’s work on shared intention and on planning theories of
intention to develop a theory of legal systems as plans. Others are
applying theories of function and of artifacts to the nature of law
(e.g., Ehrenberg 2015, 2016; Mihal 2017; Burazin et al. 2018; Burazin
et al. 2022).



Other issues in the ontology of law pertain to the nature of entities
that pervade the law, such as contracts (Fried 1981, Barnett 1985,
Hart & Holmstrom 1986), promises (Scanlon 1990, Kolodny &
Wallace 2003, Owens 2006, Shiffrin 2008), and torts (J.L. Coleman
1982, 1983, Postema 2001). The law also plays a central role in
setting up certain social categories, such as marriage and
corporations. Marriage is tightly regulated by the law in many
cultures. Does the law define what marriage is, or is marriage set up
wholly or in part by social practices? Likewise for corporations: does
the law have a privileged role in determining what types of
corporations exist in a modern society, or are corporations products
of social and economic systems? (See
 
section 5.3
.)



Social ontology also has implications for the practice of lawmaking
and adjudication. Theorists of corporate liability, for instance,
investigate the nature of corporate agency and responsibility, and the
relation between these and the agency and responsibility of individual
people connected to the corporation (French 1984, Fisse &
Braithwaite 1993, Erskine 2003, Gobert & Punch 2003, Pettit 2007).
The law is also often called on to adjudicate ontological questions,
such as whether goods of a certain kind fall under a clause of a trade
agreement, or whether a particular act is an instance of a
criminalized activity.


5.8 Language and Linguistic Objects



Whether or not language is social in nature was one of the earliest
topics in social ontology (see
 
section 1.1

 and the history supplement
 
section A.1
).
 Much work in linguistics and the philosophy of language involves
claims and assumptions about the nature of linguistic entities, such
as linguistic rules, components of the language faculty, and semantic
content. Theories of the nature of language and meaning are also
influential models for the metaphysics of other social entities (such
as artifacts, institutions, and laws).



The most conspicuous debate about the “nature of
language”—namely, the debate over innateness—does
not have much to do with the metaphysics of language. But Chomsky 1986
does take an explicit position on the nature of language and its
ontological building blocks. He argues that linguistics is the science
of “I-languages”—i.e., internalized languages, the
mental rules of grammar, phonology, and so on, that individuals use in
expressing themselves or understanding the utterances of others. He
rejects “E-languages”—externalized or public
languages like English, Chinese, and Khosa—as unscientific
fictions. Others disagree on various grounds. Katz and Postal 1991
share Chomsky’s view that each person has his or her own
language, but argue that languages are abstract or mathematical
entities rather than psychological ones (see also Higginbotham 1991).
Wittgenstein 1953 and his successors have a more substantive
disagreement: Wittgenstein denies the possibility of a “private
language” altogether, arguing that language is a matter of
engagement of people with one another and with the world. Other
philosophers have argued for the publicity and externality of language
on a variety of grounds, including the communicative basis of
language, the nature of rules, and theories of semantic content (see
Kripke 1972, 1982; Schiffer 1972; Lewis 1975; Putnam 1975; Burge 1979;
Brandom 1994; Dummett 1989; and entries on
 
theories of meaning
,
 
externalism about mental content
,
 
names
,
 and
 
the normativity of meaning and content
).



Theories of words, phonemes, and other linguistic entities are tied to
the metaphysics of language more generally, but also are subjects of
separate inquiries. The extent to which these are questions for social
ontology, rather than, say, the metaphysics of psychological states,
depends in part on whether and how language is public. Kaplan 1990,
for instance, argues that words are entities extended over time and
across a population: “utterances and inscriptions are

stages
 of words, which are the 
continuants
 made up
of these interpersonal stages”. This approach is in contrast to
type-token theories, some of which regard word-types to be socially
individuated, and others individualistically individuated (see Hugly
& Sayward 1981, Bromberger 1989, McCulloch 1991, Cappelen 1999,
Wetzel 2009, Hawthorne & Lepore 2011). In recent years, a number
of other proposals have been put forward, regarding the ontological
category into which words fit. Szabo 1999 argues that they are
representations (which he in turn understands as a sort of artifact),
Irmak 2019 that they are abstract artifacts, Nefdt 2019 that they are
positions in linguistic structures, and Miller 2021b that they are
homeostatic property cluster kinds.



Speech acts make up another domain in which social factors are
plausibly constitutive. Austin 1962 and Searle 1969 argue that the
force of any speech act is a product of a social convention pertaining
to speech acts of that type. Others use an
“intentionalist” approach, in which the force of a speech
act is a product only of the intentions of the speaker. Yet others
argue that this force is a product of the uptake by hearers in
addition to speaker intentions (see Strawson 1964, Bach & Harnish
1979, Clark & Carlson 1982, García-Carpintero 2004a, and
entries on
 
speech acts
,
 
assertion
).






Bibliography




Aarsleff, Hans, 1982, 
From Locke to Saussure: Essays on the
Study of Language and Intellectual History
, Minneapolis:
University of Minnesota Press.


Abbott, Barbara, 1989, “Nondescriptionality and Natural Kind
Terms”, 
Linguistics and Philosophy
, 12(3):
269–291. doi:10.1007/BF00635637


Adorno, Theodor W., 1966, 
Negative Dialektik
, Frankfurt
am Main: Suhrkamp.


Adorno, Theodor W. and Max Horkheimer, 1947, 
Dialektik der
Aufklärung
, Amsterdam: Querido.


Agassi, Joseph, 1975, “Institutional Individualism”,

The British Journal of Sociology
, 26(2): 144–155.
doi:10.2307/589585


Alchian, Armen A. and Harold Demsetz, 1972, “Production,
Information Costs, and Economic Organization”, 
The American
Economic Review
, 62(5): 777–795.


Alcoff, L. M., R. R. Sundstrom, G. Beckles-Raymond, M. A. Oshana,
J. L. Vest, N. Zack, J. Garcia, C. Simpson, T. J. Golden, and J. D.
Hill, 2016, 
Philosophy and the Mixed Race Experience
, Lanham:
Lexington Books.


Althusser, Louis, 1965, “L’Objet du
‘Capital’”, in Althusser et al. 1965.


Althusser, Louis, Étienne Balibar, Roger Establet, Pierre
Macherey and Jacques Rancière (eds.), 1965, 
Lire Le
Capital
, Paris: Éditions François Maspero, 2;
translated by Ben Brewster and David Fernbach, 
Reading
Capital
, London, New York: Verso Books, 2016.


Alward, Peter, 2005, “Between the Lines of Age: Reflections
on the Metaphysics of Words”, 
Pacific Philosophical
Quarterly
, 86(2): 172–187.
doi:10.1111/j.1468-0114.2005.00221.x


Andreasen, Robin O., 1998, “A New Perspective on the Race
Debate”, 
The British Journal for the Philosophy of
Science
, 49(2): 199–225. doi:10.1093/bjps/49.2.199


Antiphon, fragments in H. Diels and W. Kranz, W., 1974, 
Die
Fragmente der Vorsokratiker
, Berlin, Weidmann. (Abbreviated as
‘DK’ in the text.) English translations (including
additional material): R.K. Sprague (ed.), 2001 
The Older
Sophists
, 2nd edn., Indianapolis: Hackett; D.W. Graham (ed.),
2010, 
The Texts of Early Greek Philosophy
, vol. 2, Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press. French translation (including additional
material): J.-F. Pradeau (ed.), 2009, 
Les Sophistes
, 2 vols,
Paris: Flammarion.


Appiah, K. Anthony, 1985, “The Uncompleted Argument: Du Bois
and the Illusion of Race”, 
Critical Inquiry
, 12(1):
21–37.


–––, 1994, “Race, Culture, Identity:
Misunderstood Connections”, in K. Anthony Appiah and Amy Gutmann
(eds.), 
Color Conscious: The political morality of race
,
Princeton: Princeton University Press.


Archer, Margaret, 1995, 
Realist Social Theory: The
morphogenetic approach
, Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.


Arendt, Hannah, 1987, “Collective Responsibility,” in
James Bernhauer (ed.), 
Amor Mundi
, Dordrecht: M.
Nijhoff.


Aristotle, selections in J. Barnes (ed.), 
The Complete Works
of Aristotle
, 2 volumes, Princeton: Princeton University Press,
1984.


Arnold, Roger A., 2008, 
Macroeconomics
, Mason, OH:
Cengage.


Arrow, Kenneth J., 1994, “Methodological Individualism and
Social Knowledge”, 
The American Economic Review
, 84(2):
1–9.


Ashby, W. Ross, 1956, 
An Introduction to Cybernetics
,
London: Chapman and Hall.


Ásta, 2008, “Essentiality Conferred”,

Philosophical Studies
, 140(1): 135–148.
doi:10.1007/s11098-008-9230-4


–––, 2010, “Siding with Euthyphro:
Response-Dependence and Conferred Properties”, 
European
Journal of Philosophy
, 18(1): 108–125.


–––, 2013, “The Social Construction of
Human Kinds”, 
Hypatia
, 28(4): 716–732.


–––, 2018, 
Categories We Live By: The
Construction of Sex, Gender, Race, and Other Social Categories
,
Oxford, Oxford University Press.


Audi, Paul, 2012, “A Clarification and Defense of the Notion
of Grounding”, in Correia & Schnieder 2012: 101–121.
doi:10.1017/CBO9781139149136.004


Augustine of Hippo, 
Tractates on the Gospel of John, 1-10
,
John W. Rettig (trans.), Washington: The Catholic University of
America Press, 1988.


Austin, J.L., 1961, 
Philosophical Papers
, Oxford:
Clarendon Press. doi:10.1093/019283021X.001.0001


–––, 1962, 
How To Do Things With Words
,
Oxford: Clarendon Press.
doi:10.1093/acprof:oso/9780198245537.001.0001


Aydinonat, N. Emrah, 2008, 
The Invisible Hand in Economics:
How economists explain unintended social consequences
, London:
Routledge.


Azzouni, Jody, 2014, “A Defense of Logical
Conventionalism”, in Penelope Rush (ed.), 
The Metaphysics of
Logic
, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. 32–48.
doi:10.1017/CBO9781139626279.004


Bach, Kent and Robert M. Harnish, 1979, 
Linguistic
Communication and Speech Acts
, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.


Bach, Theodore, 2022, “Same-Tracking Real Kinds in the
Social Sciences”, 
Synthese
, 200, 1–26.


Backes, Marvin, 2021, “Can groups be genuine believers? The
argument from interpretationism,” 
Synthese
, 199:
10311–10329.


Baddorf, Matthew, 2017, “Phenomenal Consciousness,
Collective Mentality, and Collective Moral Responsibility,”

Philosophical Studies
, 174: 2769–2786.


Bahr, Amrei, Massimiliano Carrara and Ludger Jansen (eds.), 2019,
Special Issue: Functions and Kinds of Art Works and other Artifacts,

Grazer Philosophische Studien
, 96(1).


Bailey, A. M., Rettler, B., and Warmke, C., 2021,
“Philosophy, politics, and economics of cryptocurrency I: Money
without state”, 
Philosophy Compass
, 16(11):
e12785.


Baker, Lynne Rudder, 2004, “The Ontology of
Artifacts”, 
Philosophical Explorations
, 7(2):
99–111. doi:10.1080/13869790410001694462


–––, 2019, “Just What is Social
Ontology?” 
Journal of Social Ontology
, 5(1):
1–12.


Balibar, Étienne, 1965, “Sur les concepts
fondamentaux du matérialisme historique”, in Althusser et
al. 1965.


Barnes, Elizabeth, 2014, “XV—Going Beyond the
Fundamental: Feminism in Contemporary Metaphysics”,

Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society
 114:
335–351.


–––, 2016, 
The Minority Body: A Theory of
Disability
, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
doi:10.1093/acprof:oso/9780198732587.001.0001


Barnett, Randy E., 1985, “A Consent Theory of
Contract”, 
Columbia Law Review
, 86(2): 269–321.
doi:10.2307/1122705


Barney, Jay, 1991, “Firm Resources and Sustained Competitive
Advantage”, 
Journal of Management
, 17(1): 99–120.
doi:10.1177/014920639101700108


Baron, Sam., Miller, K. and Tallant, J., 2020, “Grounding at
a Distance”, 
Philosophical Studies
, 177:
3373–90.


Bateson, Gregory, 1972, 
Steps to an Ecology of Mind
, New
York: Ballantine Books.


Beauvoir, Simone de, 1949, 
Le Deuxième Sexe

(
The Second Sex
), Paris: Gallimard.


Beiser, Frederick C., 2005, 
Hegel
, London:
Routledge.


Bennett, Jonathan, 1988, “Quotation”,

Noûs
, 22(3): 399–418. doi:10.2307/2215710


Bennett, Karen, 2004a, “Global Supervenience and
Dependence”, 
Philosophy and Phenomenological Research
,
68(3): 510–529. doi:10.1111/j.1933-1592.2004.tb00364.x


–––, 2004b, “Spatio-temporal Coincidence
and the Grounding Problem”, 
Philosophical Studies
,
118(3): 339–371. doi:10.1023/B:PHIL.0000026471.20355.54


–––, 2017, 
Making Things Up
, Oxford:
Oxford University Press.


Berger, Peter L. and Thomas Luckmann, 1966, 
The Social
Construction of Reality: A treatise in the sociology of
knowledge
, London: Penguin.


Berkeley, George, 1710, 
Treatise Concerning the Principles of
Human Knowledge
, Dublin: Aaron Rhames.


Bernasconi, Robert and Tommy L. Lott, 2000, 
The Idea of
Race
, Indianapolis: Hackett.


Bernstein, Sara, 2016, “Grounding Is Not Causation”,

Philosophical Perspectives
, 30: 21–38.


–––, 2020, “The Metaphysics of
Intersectionality”, 
Philosophical Studies
, 177(2):
321–335.


Bhargava, Rajeev, 1992, 
Individualism in Social Science
,
Oxford: Clarendon Press.
doi:10.1093/acprof:oso/9780198242796.001.0001


Bhaskar, Roy 1975a. 
A Realist Theory of Science
, Leeds:
Leeds Books.


–––, 1975b, “Forms of Realism”,

Philosophica
, 15(1): 99–127.


–––, 1986, 
Scientific Realism and Human
Emancipation
, London: Verso.


–––, 1993, “Afterword”, in J.
Shotter (ed.), 
Conversational Realities
, London: Sage, pp.
185–7.


Bicchieri, Cristina, 2005, 
The Grammar of Society: The Nature
and Dynamics of Social Norms
, Cambridge, Cambridge University
Press. doi:10.1017/CBO9780511616037


Bickhard, Mark H., 2008, “Social Ontology as
Convention”, 
Topoi
, 27(1–2): 139–149.
doi:10.1007/s11245-008-9036-1


Binmore, Ken G., 1998, 
Game Theory and the Social Contract,
Volume 2: Just Playing
, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.


Bird, Alexander, 2010, “Social Knowing: The Social Sense of
‘Scientific Knowledge’”, 
Philosophical
Perspectives
, 24: 23–56.


Björnsson, Gunnar, and Kendy Hess, 2017, “Corporate
Crocodile Tears? On the Reactive Attitudes of Corporate Agents”,

Philosophy and Phenomenological Research
, 94,
273–98.


Block, Ned, 1980, “Introduction: What is
Functionalism?”, in Ned Block (ed.), 
Readings in Philosophy
of Psychology
, London: Methuen, pp. 171–184.


Bloom, Paul, 1996, “Intention, History, and Artifact
Concepts”, 
Cognition
, 60(1): 1–29.
doi:10.1016/0010-0277(95)00699-0


Borch, Christian, 2012, 
The Politics of Crowds: An Alternative
History of Sociology
, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
doi:10.1017/CBO9780511842160


Bourdieu, Pierre, 1972 [1977], 
Outline of a Theory of
Practice
 (
Esquisse d’une théorie de la
pratique
), Richard Nice (trans.), Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press. doi:10.1017/CBO9780511812507


–––, 1980 [1990], 
The Logic of Practice

(
Le sens pratique
), Richard Nice (trans.), Stanford: Stanford
University Press.


Boyd, Richard, 1991, “Realism, Anti-Foundationalism and the
Enthusiasm for Natural Kinds”, 
Philosophical Studies
,
61(1–2): 127–148. doi:10.1007/BF00385837


–––, 1999a, “Homeostasis, Species, and
Higher Taxa”, in Robert A. Wilson (ed.), 
Species: New
Interdisciplinary Essays
, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, pp.
141–185.


–––, 1999b, “Kinds, Complexity and
Multiple Realization: Comments on Millikan’s ‘Historical
Kinds and the Special Sciences’”, 
Philosophical
Studies
, 95(1–2): 67–98.
doi:10.1023/A:1004511407133


Bradley, F.H., 1893, 
Appearance and Reality
, London: Swan
Sonnenschein.


Brady, Michael, and Miranda Fricker, 2016, 
The Epistemic Life
of Groups: Essays in the Epistemology of Collectives
, Oxford:
Oxford University Press.


Brandom, Robert B., 1994, 
Making It Explicit: Reasoning,
Representing, and Discursive Commitment
, Cambridge: Harvard
University Press.


–––, 2001, “Holism and Idealism in
Hegel’s Phenomenology”, 
Hegel-Studien
, 36:
57–92.


Bratman, Michael E., 1987, 
Intention, Plans, and Practical
Reason
, Stanford: CSLI Publications.


–––, 1993, “Shared Intention”,

Ethics
, 104(1): 97–113. doi:10.1086/293577


–––, 2014, 
Shared Agency: A Planning Theory
of Acting Together
, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
doi:10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199897933.001.0001


Bromberger, Sylvain, 1989, “Types and Tokens in
Linguistics”, in Alexander George (ed.), 
Reflections on
Chomsky
, Oxford: Blackwell, pp. 58–89.


Brynjarsdottir, Eyja, 2018, 
The Reality of Money: The
Metaphysics of Financial Value
, Lanham, MD: Rowman &
Littlefield.


Burazin, Luka, Kenneth Einar Himma and Corrado Roversi (eds.),
2018, 
Law as an Artifact
, Oxford: Oxford University
Press.


Burazin, Luka, Kenneth Einar Himma, Corrado Roversi and Paweł
Banaś (eds.), 2022, 
The Artifactual Nature of Law
,
Cheltenham: Edward Elgar Publishing.


Burge, Tyler, 1975, “On Knowledge and Convention”,

Philosophical Review
, 84(2): 249–255.
doi:10.2307/2183970


–––, 1979, “Individualism and the
Mental”, 
Midwest Studies in Philosophy
, 4:
73–121. doi:10.1111/j.1475-4975.1979.tb00374.x


–––, 1986, “Intellectual Norms and
Foundations of Mind”, 
Journal of Philosophy
, 83(12):
697–720. doi:10.2307/2026694


Butler, Judith, 1988, “Performative Acts and Gender
Constitution: An Essay in Phenomenology and Feminist Theory”,

Theatre Journal
, 40(4): 519–531.
doi:10.2307/3207893


–––, 1990, 
Gender Trouble: Feminism and the
subversion of identity
, New York: Routledge.


–––, 1993, 
Bodies That Matter: On the
discursive limits of ‘sex’
, New York: Routledge.


–––, 2004, 
Undoing Gender
, New York:
Routledge.


Callon, Michel, 1999, “Actor-Network Theory: The Market
Test”, 
The Sociological Review
 (Supplement), 47:
181–195, doi:10.1111/j.1467-954X.1999.tb03488.x; reprinted 2007
in Kristin Asdal, Brita Brenna, and Ingunn Moser (eds),

Technoscience: The Politics of Interventions
, Oslo: Oslo
Academic Press, pp. 273–286.


Capitani, Erminio, M Laiacona, B Mahon, and A Caramazza, 2003,
“What are the Facts of Category-Specific Deficits? A Critical
Review of the Clinical Evidence”, 
Cognitive
Neuropsychology
, 20(3/4/5/6): 213–62.
doi:10.1080/02643290244000266


Cappelen, Herman, 1999, “Intentions in Words”,

Noûs
, 33(1): 92–102.
doi:10.1111/0029-4624.00143


Cappelen, Herman and Ernie Lepore, 1997, “Varieties of
Quotation”, 
Mind
, 106(423): 429–450.
doi:10.1093/mind/106.423.429


Carter, D. Bruce and Charlotte J. Patterson, 1982, “Sex
Roles as Social Conventions: the Development of Children’s
Conceptions of Sex-Role Stereotypes”, 
Developmental
Psychology
, 18(6): 812–824.


Carnap, Rudolf, 1928, 
Der logische Aufbau der
Welt
, Leipzig: Felix Meiner Verlag.


Carey, Susan and Elizabeth Spelke, 1994, “Domain Specific
Knowledge and Conceptual Change”, in L. Hirschfeld and S. Gelman
(eds.), 
Mapping the Mind: Domain Specificity in Cognition and
Culture
, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp.
169–200.


Cassirer, Ernst, 1910, 
Der Substanzbegriff und der
Funktionsbegriff
, Berlin: Verlag von Bruno Cassirer.


–––, 1925, 
Sprache und Mythos: Ein Beitrag
zum Problem der Götternamen
, Leipzig: Teubner.


Chakrabarti, Bikas K., Anirban Chakraborti and Arnab Chatterjee,
2007, 
Econophysics and Sociophysics: Trends and Perspectives
,
Hoboken, NJ: Wiley. doi:10.1002/9783527610006


Chalmers, David J., 1996, 
The Conscious Mind: in Search of a
Fundamental Theory
, New York: Oxford University Press.


–––, 2011, “Verbal Disputes,”

Philosophical Review
, 120(4): 515–566.


Chilovi, Samuele, 2020, “Grounding-based formulations of
legal positivism”, 
Philosophical Studies
, 177(11):
3283–3302.


Chilovi, Samuele and George Pavlakos, 2019,
“Law-Determination as Grounding: A Common Grounding Framework
for Jurisprudence”, 
Legal Theory
, 25(1):
53–76.


–––, 2022, “The Explanatory Demands of
Grounding in Law”, 
Pacific Philosophical Quarterly
,
103: 900–933.


Chomsky, Noam, 1965, 
Aspects of the Theory of Syntax
,
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.


–––, 1986, 
Knowledge of Language: Its
nature, origin, and use
, New York: Praeger.


–––, 2000, 
New Horizons in the Study of
Language and Mind
, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
doi:10.1017/CBO9780511811937


Clark, Herbert H. and Thomas B. Carlson, 1982, “Speech Acts
and Hearer’s Beliefs”, in Neilson Voyne Smith (ed.),

Mutual Knowledge
, New York: Academic Press, pp.
1–36.


Clegg, Stewart R., Cynthia Hardy and Walter R. Nord, 1996, 
The
SAGE Handbook of Organization Studies
, London: SAGE Publications
Ltd.


Coase, R.H., 1937, “The Nature of the Firm”,

Economica
, 4(16): 386–405. doi:10.2307/2626876


–––, 1960, “The Problem of Social
Cost”, 
Journal of Law and Economics
, 3: 1–44.
doi:10.1086/466560


Cohen, Hermann, 1871, 
Kants Theorie der Erfahrung
,
Berlin: Dümmler.


Cohen, Henri and Claire Lefebvre (eds.), 2005, 
Handbook of
Categorization in Cognitive Science
, Amsterdam: Elsevier.


Coleman, James S., 1990, 
Foundations of Social Theory
,
Cambridge: Belknap Press.


Coleman, Jules L., 1982, “Moral Theories of Torts: Their
Scope and Limits: Part I”, 
Law and Philosophy
, 1(3):
371–390. doi:10.1007/BF00231221


–––, 1983, “Moral Theories of Torts: Their
scope and limits: Part II”, 
Law and Philosophy
, 2(1):
5–36. doi:10.1007/BF00145311


Coleman, Jules L., Scott J. Shapiro and Kenneth Einar Himma, 2002,

The Oxford Handbook of Jurisprudence and Philosophy of Law
,
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
doi:10.1093/oxfordhb/9780199270972.001.0001


Collins, Stephanie, 2019, 
Group Duties: Their Existence and
Their Implications for Individuals
, Oxford University Press.


–––, 2023, 
Organizations as Wrongdoers: from
Ontology to Morality
, Oxford: Oxford University Press.


Comte, Auguste, 1830–1842, 
Cours de Philosophie
Positive
 (
The Course in Positive Philosophy
),
Paris-Rouen: Bachelier.


Conner, Kathleen R. and C.K. Prahalad, 1996, “A
Resource-Based Theory of the Firm: Knowledge Versus
Opportunism”, 
Organization Science
, 7(5):
477–501. doi:10.1287/orsc.7.5.477


Copp, David, 1984, “What Collectives Are: Agency,
Individualism and Legal Theory”, 
Dialogue
, 23(2):
249–269. doi:10.1017/S0012217300044899


Correia, Fabrice, 2005, 
Existential Dependence and Cognate
Notions
, Munich: Philosophia Verlag.


Correia, Fabrice and Benjamin Schnieder, 2012, 
Metaphysical
Grounding: Understanding the Structure of Reality
, Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press. doi:10.1017/CBO9781139149136


Crenshaw, Kimberle, 1991, “Mapping the Margins:
Intersectionality, Identity Politics, and Violence against Women of
Color”, 
Stanford Law Review
, 43(6): 1241–1299.
doi:10.2307/1229039


Cummins, Robert C., 1975, “Functional Analysis”,

Journal of Philosophy
, 72(20): 741–764.
doi:10.2307/2024640


Currie, Gregory, 1984, “Individualism and Global
Supervenience”, 
British Journal for the Philosophy of
Science
, 35(4): 345–358. doi:10.1093/bjps/35.4.345


Davidson, Donald, 1973, “On the Very Idea of a Conceptual
Scheme”, 
Proceedings and Addresses of the American
Philosophical Association
, 47: 5–20.


–––, 1979, “Quotation”, 
Theory
and Decision
, 11(1): 27–40. doi:10.1007/BF00126690


–––, 1987, “Knowing One’s Own
Mind”, 
Proceedings and Addresses of the American
Philosophical Association
, 60(3): 441–458.
doi:10.2307/3131782


Davis, John B., 2003, 
The Theory of the Individual in
Economics: Identity and Value
, London: Routledge.


DeLanda, Manuel, 2006, 
A New Philosophy of Society: Assemblage
Theory and Social Complexity
, London: A&C Black.


Deleplace, Ghislain and Edward J. Nell, 1996, 
Money in Motion:
The Post-Keynesian and Circulation Approaches
, New York: St.
Martin’s Press. doi:10.1007/978-1-349-24525-3


Dembroff, Robin A., 2016, “What is Sexual
Orientation?” 
Philosophers’ Imprint
, 16(3):
1–27.


Dennett, Daniel, 1991, “Real Patterns”, 
Journal of
Philosophy
, 88(1): 27–51. doi:10.2307/2027085


de Ridder, Jeroen, 2022, “Group belief reconceived”,

Synthese
, 200: 1–21.


Desan, Christine, 2014, 
Making Money: Coin, Currency, and the
Coming of Capitalism
, Oxford: Oxford University Press.


Di Sciullo, Anna-Maria and Edwin Williams, 1987, 
On the
Definition of Word
, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.


Diamond, P., 1984, “Money in Search Equilibrium”,

Econometrica
, 52(1): 1–20. doi:10.2307/1911458


Díaz-León, Esa, 2022, “Substantive
Metaphysical Debates About Gender and Race: Verbal Disputes and
Metaphysical Deflationism”, 
Journal of Social
Philosophy
, 53: 556–574.


Dipert, Randall R., 1993, 
Artifacts, Art Works, and
Agency
, Philadelphia: Temple University Press.


Dretske, Fred I., 1988, 
Explaining Behavior: Reasons in a
World of Causes
, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.


Dummett, Michael, 1989, “Language and Communication”,
in 
Reflections on Chomsky
, Alexander George (ed.), Oxford:
Blackwell, pp. 192–212. Reprinted 2010 in Darragh Byrne and Max
Kölbel (eds.), 
Arguing About Language
, London:
Routledge.


Dupré, John, 1995, 
The Disorder of Things: Metaphysical
Foundations of the Disunity of Science
, Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.


Durkheim, Émile, 1894, “Les règles de la
méthode sociologique”, 
Revue Philosophique de la
France et de l’Étranger
, 37: 465–498.


Dworkin, Ronald, 1967, “The Model of Rules”, 
The
University of Chicago Law Review
, 35(1): 14–46.


–––, 1978, 
Taking Rights Seriously
,
Cambridge: Harvard University Press.


–––, 1986, 
Law’s Empire
,
Cambridge: Belknap Press.


Eaton, Anne, 2020, “Artifacts and Their Functions”, in
Sarah Anne Carter & Ivan Gaskell (eds.), 
The Oxford Handbook
of History and Material Culture
, Oxford: Oxford University
Press.


Eaton, Marcia M., 1969, “Art, Artifacts, and
Intentions”, 
American Philosophical Quarterly
, 6(2):
165–169.


Effingham, Nikki, 2010, “The Metaphysics of Groups”,

Philosophical Studies
, 149(2): 251–267.
doi:10.1007/s11098-009-9335-4


Ehrenberg, Kenneth M., 2015, “Law’s Artifactual
Nature: How Legal Institutions Generate Normativity”, in George
Pavlakos & Veronica Rodriguez-Blanco (eds.), 
Reasons and
Intentions in Law and Practical Agency
, Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, pp. 247–266.


–––, 2016. 
The Functions of Law
,
Oxford: Oxford University Press.


Elder-Vass, Dave, 2010, 
The Causal Power of Social Structures:
Emergence, Structure and Agency
, Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press. doi:10.1017/CBO9780511761720


–––, 2012, 
The Reality of Social
Construction
, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press


–––, 2017a, “Material Parts in Social
Structures”, 
Journal of Social Ontology
, 3(1):
89–105.


–––, 2017b, “Materialising Social
Ontology”, 
Cambridge Journal of Economics
, 41(5):
1437–1451.


Elder, Crawford L., 2004, 
Real Natures and Familiar
Objects
, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.


–––, 2007, “On the Place of Artifacts in
Ontology”, in Margolis & Laurence 2007: 33–51.


Elman, Jeffrey L., Elizabeth A. Bates, Mark H. Johnson, Annette
Karmiloff-Smith, Domenico Parisi and Kim Plunkett, 1996,

Rethinking Innateness: A Connectionist Perspective on
Development
, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.


Epstein, Brian, 2008, “The Realpolitik of Reference”,

Pacific Philosophical Quarterly
, 89(1): 1–20.
doi:10.1111/j.1468-0114.2008.00307.x


–––, 2009, “Ontological Individualism
Reconsidered”, 
Synthese
, 166(1): 187–213.
doi:10.1007/s11229-007-9272-8


–––, 2010, “History and the Critique of
Social Concepts”, 
Philosophy of the Social Sciences
,
40(1): 3–29. doi:10.1177/0048393109350678


–––, 2014a, “How Many Kinds of Glue Hold
the Social World Together?”, in Mattia Gallotti and John Michael
(eds.), 
Perspectives on Social Ontology and Social Cognition
,
Dordrecht: Springer Netherlands, pp. 41–55.
doi:10.1007/978-94-017-9147-2_4


–––, 2014b, “What is Individualism in
Social Ontology? Ontological Individualism vs. Anchor
Individualism”, in Zahle & Collins 2014b: 17–38.
doi:10.1007/978-3-319-05344-8_2


–––, 2015, 
The Ant Trap: Rebuilding the
Foundations of the Social Sciences
, New York: Oxford University
Press. doi:10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199381104.001.0001


–––, 2019a, “What Are Social Groups? Their
metaphysics and how to classify them”, 
Synthese
, 196:
4899–4932. doi:10.1007/s11229-017-1387-y


–––, 2019b, “Anchoring Versus Grounding:
Reply to Schaffer”, 
Philosophy and Phenomenological
Research
, 99: 768–81.


–––, 2019c, “Replies to Hawley, Mikkola,
and Hindriks”, 
Inquiry
 62(2): 230–246.


–––, 2022, “Why Group Mental States are
not Exhaustively Determined by Member States”, 
Philosophical
Issues
, 32(1): 417–433.


Ereshefsky, Marc and Thomas A.C. Reydon, 2015, “Scientific
Kinds”, 
Philosophical Studies
, 172(4): 969–986.
doi:10.1007/s11098-014-0301-4


Eronen, Markus, 2015, “Levels of organization: a
deflationary account”, 
Biology and Philosophy
 30,
39–58.


Erskine, Toni, 2003, 
Can Institutions Have Responsibilities?:
Collective Moral Agency and International Relations
, London:
Palgrave Macmillan UK. doi:10.1057/9781403938466


Evnine, Simon, 2016, 
Making Objects and Events
, Oxford:
Oxford University Press.


Fausto-Sterling, Anne, 2000, 
Sexing the Body: Gender politics
and the construction of sexuality
, New York: Basic Books.


Ferguson, Adam, 1767, 
An Essay on the History of Civil
Society
, London: Cadell.


Ferguson, Niall, 2008, 
The Ascent of Money: A financial
history of the world
, New York: Penguin.


Ferri, Enrico, 1884, 
I nuovi orizzonti del diritto e della
procedura penale
, Bologna: Nicola Zanichelli.


Feuerbach, Ludwig A., 1843, 
Vorläufige Thesen zur Reform
der Philosophie
, Zürich: Literarisches Comptoir.


Filmer, Robert, 1680, 
Patriarcha and Other Writings
, ed.
by Johann P. Sommerville, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
1991.


Fine, Kit, 2001, “The Question of Realism”,

Philosopher’s Imprint
, 1(1): 1–30.


–––, 2012, “Guide to Ground”, in
Correia & Schnieder 2012: 37–80.
doi:10.1017/CBO9781139149136.002


Fisse, Brent and John Braithwaite, 1993, 
Corporations, Crime
and Accountability
, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
doi:10.1017/CBO9780511659133


Fodor, J.A., 1974, “Special Sciences (or: The Disunity of
Science as a Working Hypothesis)”, 
Synthese
, 28(2):
97–115. doi:10.1007/BF00485230


Forster, Michael N., 2010, 
After Herder: Philosophy of
Language in the German Tradition
, Oxford: Oxford University
Press.


Foucault, Michel, 1966 [1970], 
The Order of Things: An
Archaeology of the Human Sciences
 (
Les mots et les choses:
Une archéologie des sciences humaines
), London: Tavistock
Publications.


–––, 1976, 
Histoire de la sexualité
I: La volonté de savoir
, Paris: Gallimard.


–––, 1977a, 
Discipline and Punish: The Birth
of the Prison
, New York: Pantheon Books.


–––, 1977b, “Nietzsche, Genealogy,
History”, in Donald F. Bouchard (ed.), 
Language,
Counter-Memory, Practice: Selected Essays and Interviews
, Ithaca,
NY: Cornell University Press, pp. 139–164.


–––, 1984, 
Histoire de la sexualité
III. Le souci de soi
, Paris: Gallimard.


–––, 2001, 
L’herméneutique du
sujet
, Paris: Gallimard/Le seuil.


Franssen, Maarten, Peter Kroes, Thomas A.C. Reydon and Pieter E.
Vermaas (eds.), 2014, 
Artefact Kinds: Ontology and the Human-Made
World
, Dordrecht: Springer.


French, Peter A., 1979, “The Corporation as a Moral
Person”, 
American Philosophical Quarterly
, 16(3):
207–215.


–––, 1984, 
Collective and Corporate
Responsibility
, New York: Columbia University Press.


French, Peter A. (ed.), 1998, 
Individual and Collective
Responsibility
, Rochester, VT: Schenkman.


Freud, Sigmund, 1921, 
Massenpsychologie und Ich-Analyse

(
Group Psychology and the Analysis of the Ego
), Leipzig:
Internationaler psychoanalytischer Verlag.


–––, 1939, 
Der Mann Moses und die
monotheistische Religion: Drei Abhandlungen
, Amsterdam: De
Lange.


Fried, Charles, 1981, 
Contract as Promise: A Theory of
Contractual Obligation
, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press.


Friedman, Michael, 1995, “Poincaré’s
Conventionalism and the Logical Positivists”, 
Foundations of
Science
, 1(2): 299–314. doi:10.1007/BF00124615


Friedman, Milton and Anna Jacobson Schwartz, 1963, 
A Monetary
History of the United States, 1867–1960
, Washington:
National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.


Gallotti, Mattia and Chris D. Frith, 2013, “Social Cognition
in the We-mode”, 
Trends in Cognitive Sciences
, 17(4):
160–165. doi:10.1016/j.tics.2013.02.002


García-Carpintero, Manuel, 2004a, “Assertion and the
Semantics of Force-Markers”, in Claudia Bianchi (ed.), 
The
Semantics/Pragmatics Distinction
, Stanford: CSLI Publications,
pp. 133–166.


–––, 2004b, “The Deferred Ostension Theory
of Quotation”, 
Noûs
, 38(4): 674–692. doi:
10.1111/j.0029-4624.2004.00488.x


Garfinkel, Alan, 1981, 
Forms of Explanation: Rethinking the
questions in social theory
, New Haven: Yale University
Press.


Garfinkel, Harold, 1967, 
Studies in Ethnomethodology
,
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.


Gauthier, David P., 1986, 
Morals by Agreement
, New York:
Oxford University Press. doi:10.1093/0198249926.001.0001


Geertz, Clifford, 1973, 
The Interpretation of Cultures:
Selected Essays
, New York: Basic Books.


Gellner, Ernest A., 1956, “Explanations in History”,

Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society
 (Supplementary
Volume), 30: 157–176. Reprinted as “Holism versus
Individualism” in May Brodbeck (ed.), 
Readings in the
Philosophy of Social Science
, New York: Macmillan, 1968, pp.
254–268. doi:10.1093/aristoteliansupp/30.1.157


Gergen, Kenneth, 1999, 
An Invitation to Social
Construction
, London: Sage.


–––, 2001, 
Social Construction in
Context
, London: Sage.


Geuss, Raymond, 1981, 
The Idea of a Critical Theory: Habermas
and the Frankfurt School
, Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.


Gibbard, Alan, 1975, “Contingent Identity”,

Journal of Philosophical Logic
, 4(2): 187–221.
doi:10.1007/BF00693273


Giddens, Anthony, 1984, 
The Constitution of Society: Outline
of the Theory of Structuration
, Cambridge: Polity Press.


Gilbert, Margaret, 1983, “Notes on the Concept of a Social
Convention”, 
New Literary History
, 14(2):
225–251.


–––, 1987, “Modelling Collective
Belief”, 
Synthese
, 73(1): 185–204.
doi:10.1007/BF00485446


–––, 1989, 
On Social Facts
, Princeton:
Princeton University Press.


–––, 1990, “Walking Together: A
Paradigmatic Social Phenomenon”, 
Midwest Studies in
Philosophy
, 15(1): 1–14.
doi:10.1111/j.1475-4975.1990.tb00202.x


–––, 2000, 
Sociality and
Responsibility
, Lanham, MD: Rowman and Littlefield.


–––, 2002, “Belief and acceptance as
features of groups”, 
ProtoSociology
, 16:
35–69.


Gittler, Joseph B., 1951, “Social Ontology and the Criteria
for Definitions in Sociology”, 
Sociometry
, 14(4):
355–365.


Glasgow, Joshua, 2009, 
A Theory of Race
, New York:
Routledge.


Gobert, James and Maurice Punch, 2003, 
Rethinking Corporate
Crime
, New York: Cambridge University Press.


Goehr, Lydia, 1992, 
The Imaginary Museum of Musical Works: An
Essay in the Philosophy of Music
, Oxford: Oxford University
Press.


Goldstein, Leon J., 1958, “The Two Theses of Methodological
Individualism”, 
British Journal for the Philosophy of
Science
, 9(33): 1–11. doi:10.1093/bjps/IX.33.1


Gould, Carol, 1973–4, “The Woman Question: Philosophy
of Liberation and the Liberation of Philosophy”, 
The
Philosophical Forum
, 5(1-2): 5–44.


–––, 1978, Marx’s Social Ontology,
Cambridge: MIT Press.


–––, 1988, Rethinking Democracy, Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.


Green, T.H., 1866, “The Philosophy of Aristotle”,

North British Review
, 45(89): 55–76.


Greenawalt, Kent, 1986, “The Rule of Recognition and the
Constitution”, 
Michigan Law Review
, 85(4):
621–671.


Greenberg, Mark, 2004, “How Facts make Law”, in Scott
Hershovitz (ed.), 
Exploring Law’s Empire: The Jurisprudence
of Ronald Dworkin
, Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp.
157–198.


Greenwood, John D. (ed.), 1997, 
The Mark of the Social:
Discovery or Invention?
, Lanham, MD: Rowman and Littlefield.


–––, 2003, “Social Facts, Social Groups
and Social Explanation”, 
Noûs
, 37(1):
93–112. doi:10.1111/1468-0068.00430


Griffith, Aaron, 2018, “Social Construction and
Grounding”, 
Philosophy and Phenomenological Research
,
97(2): 393–409.


Grossman, Sanford J. and Oliver D. Hart, 1986, “The Costs
and Benefits of Ownership: A Theory of Vertical and Lateral
Integration”, 
Journal of Political Economy
, 94(4):
691–719. doi:10.1086/261404


Guala, Francesco, 2016, 
Understanding Institutions: The
Science and Philosophy of Living Together
, Princeton: Princeton
University Press.


–––, 2020, “Money as an Institution and
Money as an Object”, 
Journal of Social Ontology
, 6:
265–279.


Guala, Francesco and Frank Hindriks, 2020, “Institutions and
Functions”, in Andina, T. and Bojanić, P. (eds.),

Institutions in Action
, Springer, pp. 9–19.


Gutting, Gary, 2005, 
Foucault: A Very Short Introduction
,
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
doi:10.1093/actrade/9780192805577.001.0001


Hacking, Ian, 1995, “The Looping Effects of Human
Kinds”, in Dan Sperber, David Premack, and Ann James Premack
(eds.), 
Causal Cognition: a Multidisciplinary Debate
, Oxford:
Oxford University Press, pp. 351–383.
doi:10.1093/acprof:oso/9780198524021.003.0012


–––, 2007, “Natural Kinds: Rosy Dawn,
Scholastic Twilight”, 
Royal Institute of Philosophy
Supplement
, 61: 203–239. doi:10.1017/S1358246107000203


Hakli, Raul, 2006, “Group Beliefs and the Distinction
between Belief and Acceptance”, 
Cognitive Systems
Research
, 7(2–3): 286–297.
doi:10.1016/j.cogsys.2005.11.013


Hall, Tracy Alan, 1999, “The Phonological Word: A
Review”, in Hall & Kleinhenz 1999: 1–22.
doi:10.1075/cilt.174.02hal


Hall, Tracy Alan and Ursula Kleinhenz (eds.), 1999, 
Studies on
the Phonological Word
, Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
doi:10.1075/cilt.174


Hardimon, Michael O., 2012, “The Idea of a Scientific
Concept of Race”, 
Journal of Philosophical Research
,
37: 249–282. doi:10.5840/jpr20123713


Harman, Graham, 2005, 
Guerrilla Metaphysics: Phenomenology and
the Carpentry of Things
, New York: Open Court.


Harris, Keith, 2020, “How Individuals Constitute Group
Agents.” 
Canadian Journal of Philosophy
, 50:
350–364.


Hart, H.L.A., 1961, 
The Concept of Law
, Oxford: Clarendon
Press.


Hart, Oliver and Bengt Holmstrom, 1986, “The Theory of
Contracts”, Working paper 418, Department of Economics,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT).
 
Hart & Holmstrom available online
]


Hart, Oliver and John Moore, 1990, “Property Rights and the
Nature of the Firm”, 
Journal of Political Economy
,
98(6): 1119–1158. doi:10.1086/261729


Hartmann, Klaus, 1972, “Hegel: A Non-metaphysical
View”, in Alasdair MacIntyre (ed.), 
Hegel: A Collection of
Critical Essays
, Notre Dame, IN: Notre Dame Press, pp.
101–124.


Haslanger, Sally, 2000, “Gender and Race: (What) Are They?
(What) Do We Want Them To Be?”, 
Noûs
, 34(1):
31–55. doi:10.1111/0029-4624.00201


–––, 2003, “Social Construction: The
‘Debunking’ Project”, in Schmitt 2003b.


–––, 2012, 
Resisting Reality: Social
Construction and Social Critique
, Oxford: Oxford University
Press. doi:10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199892631.001.0001


–––, 2016a, “Theorizing with a Purpose:
The Many Kinds of Sex”, in Catherine Kendig (ed.), 
Natural
Kinds and Classification in Scientific Practice
, New York:
Routledge, pp. 129–144.


–––, 2016b, “What is a (Social) Structural
Explanation?” 
Philosophical Studies
, 173(1):
113–130.


–––, 2018, “What is a Social
Practice?” 
Royal Institute of Philosophy Supplement to
Philosophy
, 82: 231–247.


–––, 2019, “Tracing the Sociopolitical
Reality of Race” in 
What is Race? Four Philosophical
Views
, New York: Oxford, pp. 4–37.


–––, 2022, “Failures of Methodological
Individualism: The Materiality of Social Systems”, 
Journal
of Social Philosophy
, 53: 512–534.


Hawley, Katherine, 2017, “Social Mereology”,

Journal of the American Philosophical Association
, 3(4):
395–411.


–––, 2019, “Comments on Brian
Epstein’s The Ant Trap”, 
Inquiry
, 62(2):
217–229.


Hawthorne, John and Ernest Lepore, 2011, “On Words”,

Journal of Philosophy
, 108(9): 447–485.


Hayles, N. Katherine, 1999, 
How We Became Posthuman: Virtual
Bodies in Cybernetics, Literature, and Informatics
, Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.


Hegel, G.W.F., 1807, 
Phänomenologie des Geistes
,
Bamberg, Würzburg: Verlag Joseph Anton Goebhardt.


Heidegger, Martin, 1927, 
Sein und Zeit
 (
Being and
Time
), Tübingen: Max Niemeyer.


Held, Virginia, 1970, “Can a Random Collection of
Individuals be Responsible?,” 
Journal of Philosophy
,
67: 471–481.


Heraclitus, fragments in H. Diels and W. Kranz, 1974, 
Die
Fragmente der Vorsokratiker
, Berlin, Weidmann. (Abbreviated as
‘DK’ in the text.) English translations (including
additional material): R.K. Sprague (ed.), 2001 
The Older
Sophists
, 2nd edn., Indianapolis: Hackett; D.W. Graham (ed.),
2010, 
The Texts of Early Greek Philosophy
, vol. 2, Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press. French translation (including additional
material): J.-F. Pradeau (ed.), 2009, 
Les Sophistes
, 2 vols,
Paris: Flammarion.


Herder, Johann Gottfried von, 1769, 
Kritische
Wälder
, Riga: Hartknoch.


–––, 1772, 
Abhandlung über den Ursprung
der Sprache
, Berlin: Voß.


–––, 1774, 
Auch eine Philosophie der
Geschichte zur Bildung der Menschheit
, Riga: Hartknoch.


Hess, Kendy M., 2010, “The Modern Corporation as Moral
Agent”, 
Southwest Philosophy Review
, 26(1):
61–69. doi:10.5840/swphilreview20102618


Higginbotham, James, 1991, “Remarks on the Metaphysics of
Linguistics”, 
Linguistics and Philosophy
, 14(5):
555–566. doi:10.1007/BF00632597


Hilpinen, Risto, 1992a, “Authors and Artifacts”,

Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society
, 93(1):
155–178. doi:10.1093/aristotelian/93.1.155


–––, 1992b, “On Artifacts and Works of
Art”, 
Theoria
, 58(1): 58–82.
doi:10.1111/j.1755-2567.1992.tb01155.x


Hindriks, Frank, 2013, “The Location Problem in Social
Ontology”, 
Synthese
, 190(3): 413–437.
doi:10.1007/s11229-011-0036-0


Hobbes, Thomas, 1651, 
Leviathan
, ed. by Richard Tuck,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1996.


Hochman, Adam, 2013, “Against the New Racial
Naturalism”, 
Journal of Philosophy
, 110(6):
331–351. doi:10.5840/jphil2013110625


Hoover, Kevin D., 1995, “Is Macroeconomics for Real?”,

The Monist
, 78(3): 235–257.
doi:10.5840/monist19957832


–––, 2001a, 
Causality in
Macroeconomics
, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.


–––, 2001b, 
The Methodology of Empirical
Macroeconomics
, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.


–––, 2009, “Microfoundations and the
Ontology of Macroeconomics”, in Harold Kincaid and Don Ross
(eds.), 
Oxford Handbook of Philosophy of Economics
, Oxford:
Oxford University Press, pp. 386–409.


Horstmann, Rolf-Peter, 2006, “Hegel’s Phenomenology of
Spirit as an Argument for a Monistic Ontology”,

Inquiry
, 49(1): 103–118.
doi:10.1080/00201740500497530


Huebner, Bryce, 2013, 
Macrocognition: A Theory of Distributed
Minds and Collective Intentionality
, Oxford: Oxford University
Press. doi:10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199926275.001.0001


Hugly, Philip and Charles Sayward, 1981, “Expressions and
Tokens”, 
Analysis
, 41(4): 181–187.
doi:10.1093/analys/41.4.181


Hume, David, 1740, 
A Treatise of Human Nature
, London:
John Noon.


–––, 1748, 
Essays: Moral, Political, and
Literary
.


Husserl, Edmund, 1936, 
The Crisis of European Sciences and
Transcendental Phenomenology
, David Carr (trans.), Evanston:
Northwestern University Press, 1970.


–––, 1950, 
Cartesianische Meditationen und
Pariser Vorträge
, Den Haag: Nijhoff.


Hutchins, Edwin, 1995, 
Cognition in the Wild
, Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.


Ikäheimo, Heikki and Laitinen, Arto (eds.), 2011,

Recognition and Social Ontology
, Leiden: Brill.


Irmak, Nurbay, 2012, “Software is an Abstract
Artifact”, 
Grazer Philosophische Studien
, 86(1):
55–72.


–––, 2019, “An Ontology of Words”,
Erkenntnis, 84(5): 1139–1158.


–––, 2021, “The problem of creation and
abstract artifacts”, Synthese, 198: 9695–9708.


Iseminger, Gary, 1973, “The Work of Art as Artifact”,

The British Journal of Aesthetics
, 13(1): 3–16.
doi:10.1093/bjaesthetics/13.1.3


Jakobson, Roman, 1931, 
K charakteristike evrazijskogo
jazykovogo sojuza
, Paris: Izdanie evrazijcev.


Jansen, Ludger, 2009, “Unity and Constitution of Social
Entities”, in Ludger Honnefelder, Edmund Runggaldier, and
Benedikt Schick (eds.), 
Unity and Time in Metaphysics
,
Berlin: De Gruyter, pp. 15–45.


–––, 2017, “Constructed Reality”, in
Kirchberg. K., Neges, J. Mitterer, S. Kletzl and C. Kanzian (eds.),

Realism – Relativism – Constructivism: Proceedings of
the 38th International Wittgenstein Symposium
, Berlin: De
Gruyter, pp.  255–268.


Jarvie, Ian C., 1972, 
Concepts and Society
, London:
Routledge and Kegan Paul.


–––, 1998, “Situational Logic and Its
Reception”, 
Philosophy of the Social Sciences
, 28(3):
365–380. doi:10.1177/004839319802800303


Jaspers, Karl, 1961, 
The Question of German Guilt
, E.B.
Ashton (trans.), New York: Capricorn.


Jeffers, C., 2013, “The Cultural Theory of Race: Yet Another
Look at Du Bois’s ‘The Conservation of
Races’”, 
Ethics
, 123: 403–426.


–––, 2019, “Cultural
Constructionism” in 
What is Race? Four Philosophical
Views
, New York: Oxford.


Jenkins, Katharine, 2016, “Amelioration and Inclusion:
Gender Identity and the Concept of Woman”, 
Ethics
, 126:
394–421.


–––, 2023, “Ontology and Oppression: Race,
Gender, and Social Reality”, Oxford: Oxford University
Press.


Jensen, Michael C. and William H. Meckling, 1976, “Theory of
the Firm: Managerial Behavior, Agency Costs and Ownership
Structure”, 
Journal of Financial Economics
, 3(4):
305–360. doi:10.1016/0304-405X(76)90026-X


Jevons, William Stanley, 1871, 
The Theory of Political
Economy
, London: Macmillan.


Jones, Karen, 2014, “Intersectionality and Ameliorative
Analyses of Race and Gender”, 
Philosophical Studies
,
171(1): 99–107. doi:10.1007/s11098-013-0245-0


Julien, Marit, 2007, “The Relation Between Morphology and
Syntax”, in Gillian Ramchand and Charles Reiss (eds.), 
The
Oxford Handbook of Linguistic Interfaces
, Oxford: Oxford
University Press, pp. 209–238.


Jupille, Joseph and James Caporaso, 2022, 
Theories of
Institutions
, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.


Juvshik, Tim, 2021, “Artifacts and Mind-dependence”,

Synthese
, 199(3-4): 9313–9336.


Kaldor, Nicholas, 1985, 
The Scourge of Monetarism
,
Oxford; New York: Oxford University Press.


Kant, Immanuel, 1781/1787, 
Critique of Pure Reason
,
trans. by P. Guyer and A. Wood, Cambridge; New York: Cambridge
University Press, 1987.


Kaplan, David, 1989, “Demonstratives”, in Joseph
Almog, Howard K. Wettstein and John Perry (eds.), 
Themes from
Kaplan
, New York: Oxford University Press, pp.
481–563.


–––, 1990, “Words”, 
Aristotelian
Society Supplementary Volume
, 64: 93–119.
doi:10.1093/aristoteliansupp/64.1.93


Kaplan, Jonathan Michael and Rasmus Grønfeldt Winther,
2014, “Realism, Antirealism, and Conventionalism About
Race”, 
Philosophy of Science
, 81(5): 1039–1052.
doi:10.1086/678314


Katz, Jerrold J. and Paul M. Postal, 1991, “Realism vs.
Conceptualism in Linguistics”, 
Linguistics and
Philosophy
, 14(5): 515–554. doi:10.1007/BF00632596


Keil, Frank C., Marissa L. Greif and Rebbekkah S. Kerner, 2007,
“A world apart: How concepts of the constructed world are
different in representation and in development”, in Margolis
& Laurence 2007: 231–245.


Kekes, John, 1985, “Moral Conventionalism”,

American Philosophical Quarterly
, 22(1): 37–46.


Khalidi, Muhammad Ali, 2016, “Mind-Dependent Kinds”,

Journal of Social Ontology
, 2(2): 223–246.


–––, 2018, “Natural Kinds as Nodes in
Causal Networks”, 
Synthese
, 195(4): 1379–96.


Kincaid, Harold, 1986, “Reduction, Explanation and
Individualism”, 
Philosophy of Science
, 53(4):
492–513. Reprinted in Michael Martin and Llee C. McIntyre
(eds.), 
Readings in the Philosophy of Social Science
,
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1994, pp. 497–515.
doi:10.1086/289337


–––, 1997, 
Individualism and the Unity of
Science
, Lanham: Rowman and Littlefield.


–––, 1998, “Supervenience”, in John
B. Davis, D. Wade Hands and Uskali Mäki (eds.), 
The Handbook
of Economic Methodology
, Cheltenham: Edward Elgar, pp.
487–488.


Kirby, Simon, 1999, 
Function, Selection, and Innateness: The
Emergence of Language Universals
, Oxford: Oxford University
Press.


Kitcher, Philip, 2007, “Does ‘Race’ Have a
Future?”, 
Philosophy & Public Affairs
, 35(4):
293–317. doi:10.1111/j.1088-4963.2007.00115.x


Kiyotaki, Nobuhiro and Randall Wright, 1989, “On Money as a
Medium of Exchange”, 
Journal of Political economy
,
97(4): 927–954. doi:10.1086/261634


Knoblich, Günther, Stephen A. Butterfill and Natalie Sebanz,
2011, “Psychological Research on Joint Action: Theory and
Data”, in Brian H. Ross (ed.), 
Advances in Research and
Theory
, (Psychology of Learning and Motivation – Advances in
Research and Theory, 54), Elsevier, pp. 59–101.
doi:10.1016/B978-0-12-385527-5.00003-6


Kocherlakota, Narayana R., 1998, “Money is Memory”,

Journal of Economic Theory
, 81(2): 232–251.
doi:10.1006/jeth.1997.2357


Kõiv, R., 2019, “Causal Social Construction”,

Journal of Social Ontology
, 5: 77–99.


Kolodny, Niko and R. Jay Wallace, 2003, “Promises and
Practices Revisited”, 
Philosophy & Public Affairs
,
31(2): 119–154. doi:10.1111/j.1088-4963.2003.00119.x


Koopman, Colin, 2013, 
Genealogy as Critique: Foucault and the
Problems of Modernity
, Bloomington, IN: Indiana University
Press.


Korman, Daniel Z., 2015, 
Objects: Nothing Out of the
Ordinary
, Oxford: Oxford University Press.


Kornblith, Hilary, 1980, “Referring to Artifacts”,

Philosophical Review
, 89: 109–114.
doi:10.2307/2184866


Koslicki, Kathrin, 2016, “Where Grounding and Causation Part
Ways: Comments on Schaffer,” 
Philosophical Studies
,
173: 101–12.


–––, 2018, 
Form, Matter, Substance
,
Oxford: Oxford University Press.


Kraaijenbrink, Jeroen, J.-C. Spender, and Aard J. Groen, 2010,
“The Resource-Based View: A Review and Assessment of Its
Critiques”, 
Journal of Management
, 36:
349–72.


Kreines, James, 2015, 
Reason in the World: Hegel’s
Metaphysics and its Philosophical Appeal
, New York: Oxford
University Press. doi:10.1093/acprof:oso/9780190204303.001.0001


Kripke, Saul A., 1972, “Naming and Necessity”, in
Donald Davidson and Gilbert Harman (eds.), 
Semantics of Natural
Language
, Dordrecht: Riedel, pp. 253–355.


–––, 1982, 
Wittgenstein on Rules and Private
Language: An Elementary Exposition
, Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.


Kroes, Peter, 2012, 
Technical Artefacts: Creations of Mind and
Matter
, Dordrecht: Springer.


Kukla, André, 2000, 
Social Constructivism and the
Philosophy of Science
, London: Routledge.


Kukla, Quill R and Mark Lance, 2014, “Intersubjectivity and
Receptive Experience”, 
The Southern Journal of
Philosophy
, 52: 22–42.


Lackey, Jennifer, 2014, 
Essays in Collective
Epistemology
, Oxford University Press.


–––, 2016, “What Is Justified Group
Belief”, 
Philosophical Review
, 125: 341–396.


–––, 2020a, 
The Epistemology of Groups
,
Oxford University Press.


–––, 2020b, “Group Belief: Lessons from
Lies and Bullshit”, 
Aristotelian Society Supplementary
Volume
, 94: 185–208.


Lagerspetz, Eerik, 1995, 
The Opposite Mirrors: An Essay on the
Conventionalist Theory of Institutions
, Dordrecht: Springer
Netherlands. doi:10.1007/978-94-017-3409-7


Laitinen, Arto, 2002, “Interpersonal Recognition: A Response
to Value or a Precondition of Personhood?”, 
Inquiry
,
45(4): 463–478.


Latour, Bruno, 2005, 
Reassembling the Social: An Introduction
to Actor-Network Theory
, Oxford: Oxford University Press.


Law, John, 2009, “Actor Network Theory and Material
Semiotics”, in Bryan S. Turner (ed.), 
The New Blackwell
Companion to Social Theory
, Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell, pp.
141–158. doi:10.1002/9781444304992.ch7


Lawson, Tony, 1997, 
Economics and Reality
, London:
Routledge.


Le Bon, Gustave, 1895, 
Psychologie des foules
, Paris:
Germer.


Lévi-Strauss, Claude, 1945, “L’Analyse
Structurale en Linguistique et en Anthropologie”, 
Word
,
1(1): 33–53. doi:10.1080/00437956.1945.11659244


–––, 1963, 
Structural Anthropology
, New
York: Basic Books.


Levinson, Jerrold, 1980, “What a Musical Work Is”,

Journal of Philosophy
, 77(1): 5–28.
doi:10.2307/2025596


–––, 2007, “Artworks as artifacts”,
in Margolis & Laurence 2007: 74–82.


Lewis, David K., 1969, 
Convention: A philosophical study
,
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.


–––, 1975, “Languages and Language”,
in Keith Gunderson (ed.), 
Language, Mind, and Knowledge
,
(Minnesota Studies in the Philosophy of Science, 7), Minneapolis:
University of Minnesota Press, pp. 3–35.


List, Christian, 2014, “Three Kinds of Collective
Attitudes”, 
Erkenntnis
 (Supplement), 79(9):
1601–22. doi:10.1007/s10670-014-9631-z


–––, 2018, “What is it like to be a group
agent?”, 
Noûs
, 52(2): 295–319.


–––, 2019, “Levels: Descriptive,
Explanatory, and Ontological”, 
Noûs
, 53(4):
852–883.


List, Christian and Philip Pettit, 2002, “Aggregating Sets
of Judgments: An impossibility result”, 
Economics and
Philosophy
, 18: 89–110.


–––, 2011, 
Group Agency: The Possibility,
Design, and Status of Corporate Agents
, Oxford: Oxford University
Press. doi:10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199591565.001.0001


List, Christian and Kai Spiekermann, 2013, “Methodological
Individualism and Holism in Political Science: A
Reconciliation”, 
American Political Science Review
,
107(4): 629–643. doi:10.1017/S0003055413000373


Little, Daniel, 1991, 
Varieties of Social Explanation
,
Boulder: Westview Press.


Livet, Pierre and Frédéric Nef, 2009, 
Les
êtres sociaux: Processus et virtualité
, Paris:
Hermann.


Locke, John, 1689, 
Locke’s Two Treatises of
Government
, ed. by Peter Laslett, Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 1960.


–––, 1690. 
An Essay concerning Human
Understanding
, ed. by P. H. Nidditch, Oxford: Clarendon,
1975.


López de Sa, Dan, 2007, “The Chief Supreme Court
Justice: A Metaphysical Puzzle? (El presidente del tribunal supremo:
¿un problema metafísico?”, 
Crítica:
Revista Hispanoamericana de Filosofía
, 39(115),
61–68.


Ludwig, Kirk, 2016, 
From Individual to Plural Agency:
Collective Action I
, Oxford: Oxford University Press UK.


–––, 2017, 
From Plural to Institutional
Agency: Collective Action II
, Oxford: Oxford University
Press.


Ludwig, Kirk and Ray, Greg, 2018, “Unity in the Variety of
Quotation”, in Paul Saka and Michael Alan Johnson (eds.),

The Semantics and Pragmatics of Quotation
, Dordrecht:
Springer, pp. 99–134.


Lukács, György [Georg], 1923 [1971],
“Reification and the Consciousness of the Proletariat”, in
his 
History and Class Consciousness: Studies in Marxist
Dialectics
 (
Geschichte und Klassenbewusstsein
), Rodney
Livingstone (trans.), Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, pp. 83–222.


–––, 1964–68 [1986], 
Zur Ontologie des
gesellschaftlichen Seins (Toward an Ontology of Social Being)
,
ed. by F. Benseler, Darmstadt and Neuwied: Luchterhand.


Lukes, Steven, 1985, 
Emile Durkheim, His Life and Work: A
Historical and Critical Study
, Stanford: Stanford University
Press.


Macdonald, Graham and Philip Pettit, 1981, 
Semantics and
Social Science
, London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.


Mach, Ernst, 1886, 
Beiträge zur Analyse der
Empfindungen
, Jena: G. Fischer.


MacIntyre, Alasdair, 1984, 
After Virtue: A Study in Moral
Theory
, Notre Dame, IN: University of Notre Dame Press.


Macpherson, C.B., 1962, 
The Political Theory of Possessive
Individualism
, Oxford: Clarendon Press.


Mag Uidhir, Christy, 2013, 
Art and Art-Attempts
, Oxford:
Oxford University Press.


Mahon, Bradford and Alfonso Caramazza, 2009, “Concepts and
Categories: A Cognitive Neuropsychological Perspective”,

Annual Review of Psychology
, 60: 27–51.
doi:10.1146/annurev.psych.60.110707.163532


Maki, Uskali, 2020, “Reflections on the Ontology of
Money”, 
Journal of Social Ontology
, 6:
245–63.


Mallon, Ron, 2003, “Social Construction, Social Roles, and
Stability”, in Schmitt 2003b: 327–353.


–––, 2016, 
The Construction of Human
Kinds
, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
doi:10.1093/acprof:oso/9780198755678.001.0001


Mandelbaum, Maurice, 1955, “Societal Facts”,

British Journal of Sociology
, 6(4): 305–317.
doi:10.2307/587130


Mandler, Jean, 2004, 
The Foundations of Mind: Origins of
Conceptual Thought
, New York: Oxford University Press.


Mankiw, N. Gregory, 2016, 
Principles of Macroeconomics
,
Stamford, CT: Cengage.


Mannheim, Karl, 1929, 
Ideologie und Utopie
, Bonn:
Cohen.


Marconi, Diego, 2013, “Pencils Have a Point: Against General
Externalism About Artifactual Words”, 
Review of Philosophy
and Psychology
, 4(3): 497–513.
doi:10.1007/s13164-013-0147-2


Margolis, Eric and Stephen Laurence (eds.), 2007, 
Creations of
the Mind: Theories of Artifacts and Their Representation
, Oxford:
Oxford University Press.


Marmor, Andrei, 2009, 
Social Conventions: from Language to
Law
, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.


Marques, Teresa, 2017, “The Relevance of Causal Social
Construction”, 
Journal of Social Ontology
, 3(1):
1–25.


Martin, J. L., 2009, 
Social Structures
, Princeton:
Princeton University Press.


Marx, Karl, 1867, 
Das Kapital: Kritik der Politischen
Ökonomie
 (
Capital
), Hamburg: Verlag von Otto
Meisner.


Mas-Colell, Andreu, Michael D. Whinston, and Jerry R. Green, 1995,

Microeconomic Theory
, New York: Oxford University Press.


Mason, R., 2020, “Against Social Kind Anti-Realism”,

Metaphysics
, 3(1): 55–67.


–––, 2021, “Social Kinds are Essentially
Mind-dependent”, 
Philosophical Studies
, 178(12):
3975–3994.


May, Larry, 1992, 
Sharing Responsibility
, Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.


McCall, Leslie, 2005, “The Complexity of
Intersectionality”, 
Signs: Journal of women in culture and
society
, 30(3): 1771–1800. doi:10.1086/426800


McCulloch, Gregory, 1991, “Making Sense of Words”,

Analysis
, 51(2): 73–79. doi:10.1093/analys/51.2.73


McEachern, William A., 2011, 
Economics: a Contemporary
Introduction
, Boston, MA: Cengage Learning.


McGrath, Matthew, 2008, “Conciliatory Metaontology and the
Vindication of Common Sense”, 
Noûs
, 42:
482–508.


McLaughlin, Brian P., 2006, “Is Role-functionalism Committed
to Epiphenomenalism?”, 
Journal of Consciousness
Studies
, 13(1–2): 39–66.


McMahon, Christopher, 2003, “Two Modes of Collective
Belief”, 
ProtoSociology
, 18: 347–362.


McPherson, Lionel K., 2015, “Deflating
‘Race’”, 
Journal of the American Philosophical
Association
, 1(4): 674–693. doi:10.1017/apa.2015.19


Mead, George H., 1913, “The Social Self”, 
Journal
of Philosophy, Psychology and Scientific Methods
, 10(14):
374–380. doi:10.2307/2012910


–––, 1934, 
Mind, Self and Society
,
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.


Mead, Margaret, H. L. Teuber and Heinz Von Foerster (eds.),
1950–1956, 
Cybernetics: Transactions
, New York: Josiah
Macy, Jr. Foundation. The transactions of several conferences,
sometimes known as Macy conferences.


Mellor, D.H., 1982, “The Reduction of Society”,

Philosophy
, 57(219): 51–75.
doi:10.1017/S0031819100069539


Menger, Carl, 1892, “On the Origins of Money”,

Economic Journal
, 2: 239–255.


Merleau-Ponty, Maurice, 1945, 
Phénoménologie de
la Perception
, Paris: Gallimard.


Merton, Robert K., 1957, “Manifest and Latent
Functions”, in his 
Social Theory and Social Structure
,
Glencoe, IL: The Free Press.


Mihal, Jan, 2017, “Defending a Functional Kinds Approach to
Law”, 
Australian Journal of Legal Philosophy
, 42:
121–144.


Mikkola, Mari, 2015, “Doing Ontology and Doing Justice: What
Feminist Philosophy Can Teach Us About Meta-Metaphysics”,

Inquiry
, 58(7-8): 780–805.


–––, 2019, “Grounding and Anchoring: On
the structure of Epstein’s social ontology”,

Inquiry
, 62(2): 198–216.


Mill, John Stuart, 1843, 
A System of Logic, Ratiocinative and
Inductive
, London: John W. Parker.


Miller, James, 2021, “Words, Species, and Kinds”,

Metaphysics
, 4(1): 18–31.


Millikan, Ruth Garrett, 1984, 
Language, Thought, and Other
Biological Categories: New Foundations for Realism
, Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.


–––, 1999, “Historical Kinds and the
‘Special Sciences’”, 
Philosophical Studies
,
95(1–2): 45–65. doi:10.1023/A:1004532016219


–––, 2005, 
Language: A Biological
Model
, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
doi:10.1093/0199284768.001.0001


Montesquieu, Charles-Louis, 1748, 
The Spirit of the Laws
,
A. Cohler, C. Miller, and H. Stone (trans. and eds.), Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 1989.


Moody-Adams, Michele, 1994, “Culture, Responsibility and
Affected Ignorance,” 
Ethics
, 104: 291–309.


Moore, Basil J., 1988, 
Horizontalists and Verticalists: The
Macroeconomics of Credit Money
, Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.


Natorp, Paul, 1888, 
Einleitung in die Psychologie nach
kritische Methode
, Freiburg: J.C.B. Mohr.


Nefdt, R. M., 2019, “The Ontology of Words: a structural
approach”, 
Inquiry
, 62(8): 877–911.


Nietzsche, Friedrich, 1887, 
On the Genealogy of Morals
,
Walter Kaufmann and R.J. Hollingdale (trans.), in 
On the Genealogy
of Morals and Ecce Homo
, New York: Random House, 1967.


North, Douglass C., 1990, 
Institutions, Institutional Change
and Economic Performance
, Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.


O’Neill, John, 1973, 
Modes of Individualism and
Collectivism
, London: Heinemann Educational.


Okin, Susan Moller, 1989, 
Justice, Gender, and the
Family
, New York: Basic Books.


Oppenheim, Paul and Hilary Putnam, 1958, “Unity of Science
as a Working Hypothesis”, in Herbert Feigl, Michael Scriven, and
Grover Maxwell, 
Concepts, Theories, and the Mind-Body Problem

(Minnesota Studies in the Philosophy of Science: Volume 2),
Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, pp. 3–36.


Ortner, Sherry B., 1984, “Theory in Anthropology since the
Sixties”, 
Comparative Studies in Society and History
,
26(1): 126–166. doi:10.1017/S0010417500010811


Ostrom, Elinor, 1990, 
Governing the Commons: The Evolution of
Institutions for Collective Action
, Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.


–––, 1995, 
Understanding Institutional
Diversity
, Princeton: Princeton University Press.


Owens, David, 2006, “A Simple Theory of Promising”,

Philosophical Review
, 115(1): 51–77.


Papadopoulos, Georgios, 2015, “Collective Intentionality and
the State Theory of Money”, 
Erasmus Journal for Philosophy
and Economics
, 8(2): 1–20.


Pareto, Vilfredo, 1916, 
Trattato Di Sociologia Generale
,
Firenze: G. Barbéra.


Parsons, Talcott, 1951, 
The Social System
, Glencoe: Free
Press.


Passinsky, Asya, 2020, “Social Objects, Response-Dependence,
and Realism”, 
Journal of the American Philosophical
Association
, 6(4): 431–443.


–––, 2020, “Should Bitcoin Be Classified
as Money?”, 
Journal of Social Ontology
, 6(2):
281–292.


–––, 2021, “Finean Feminist
Metaphysics”, 
Inquiry
, 64(9): 937–954.


Paulus, selection in 
Pandects of Justinian, Book 18
,
trans. by S.P. Scott, 
The Civil Law, Book 5
, Cincinnati: The
Central Trust Company, 1932.


Penrose, Edith T., 1959, 
The Theory of the Growth of the
Firm
, New York: John Wiley and Sons.


Pettit, Philip, 1993, 
The Common Mind: An Essay on Psychology,
Society, and Politics
, New York: Oxford University Press.
doi:10.1093/0195106458.001.0001


–––, 2003, “Groups with Minds of Their
Own”, in Schmitt 2003b: 167–194.


–––, 2007, “Responsibility
incorporated”, 
Ethics
, 117(2): 171–201.
doi:10.1086/510695


Phillips, Anne, 2010, “What’s wrong with
essentialism?”, 
Distinktion: Scandinavian Journal of Social
Theory
, 11(1): 47–60.
doi:10.1080/1600910X.2010.9672755


Piaget, Jean, 1926, 
La représentation du monde chez
l’enfant
, Paris: F. Alcan.


Pickering, Andrew, 1984, 
Constructing Quarks: A Sociological
History of Particle Physics
, Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.


Pippin, Robert B., 1989, 
Hegel’s Idealism: The
Satisfactions of Self-Consciousness
, Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.


Plato, selections in J. M. Cooper (ed.), 
Plato: Complete
Works
, Indianapolis: Hackett, 1997.


Plunkett, David, 2012, “A Positivist Route for Explaining
How Facts Make Law”, 
Legal Theory
, 18(2):
139–207.


Popper, Karl, 1945, 
The Open Society and its Enemies
,
London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.


Postema, Gerald J., 2001, 
Philosophy and the Law of
Torts
, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.


Potochnik, Angela, 2010, “Levels of Explanation
Reconceived”, 
Philosophy of Science
, 77(1):
59–72. doi:10.1086/650208


Potochnik, Angela and Brian McGill, 2012, “The Limitations
of Hierarchical Organization”, 
Philosophy of Science
,
79(1): 120–140. doi:10.1086/663237


Powell, W. W. and P. J. DiMaggio, 2012, 
The New
Institutionalism in Organizational Analysis
, Chicago: University
of Chicago Press.


Predelli, Stefano, 2008, “The Demonstrative Theory of
Quotation”, 
Linguistics and Philosophy
, 31(5):
555–572. doi:10.1007/s10988-008-9042-1


Preston, Beth, 2009, “Philosophical Theories of Artifact
Function”, in Anthonie Meijers (ed.), 
Philosophy of
Technology and Engineering Sciences
, (Handbook of the Philosophy
of Science), Amsterdam: Elsevier, pp. 213–233.


–––, 2013, 
A Philosophy of Material Culture:
Action, Function, and Mind
, (Routledge Studies in Contemporary
Philosophy, 48), New York: Routledge.


Pufendorf, Samuel, 1673, 
De officio hominis et civis juxta
legem naturalem libri duo
, Lund: Junghans.


Putnam, Hilary, 1975, “The Meaning of
‘Meaning’”, in his 
Philosophical Papers
,
volume 2, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
doi:10.1017/CBO9780511625251.014


Quetelet, Adolphe, 1848, 
Du système social et des lois
qui le régissent
, Paris: Guillaumin.


Quine, W.V., 1936, “Truth by Convention”, 
Journal
of Symbolic Logic
, pp. 77–106.


–––, 1951, “Two Dogmas of
Empiricism”, 
Philosophical Review
, 60(1):
20–43.


–––, 1960, 
Word and Object
, Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.


Raffelsiefen, Renate, 1999, “Diagnostics for Prosodic Words
Revisited: The Case of Historically Prefixed Words in English”,
in Hall & Kleinhenz 1999: 133–202.
doi:10.1075/cilt.174.07raf


Raven, Michael J., 2015, “Ground”, 
Philosophy
Compass
, 10(5): 322–333. doi:10.1111/phc3.12220


Recanati, François, 1993, 
Direct Reference
,
Oxford: Blackwell.


–––, 2001, “Open Quotation”,

Mind
, 110(439): 637–687.
doi:10.1093/mind/110.439.637


Reckwitz, Andreas, 2002, “Toward a Theory of Social
Practices: A Development in Culturalist Theorizing”,

European Journal of Social Theory
, 5(2): 243–263.
doi:10.1177/13684310222225432


Rescher, Nicholas, 2000, 
Process Philosophy: A Survey of Basic
Issues
, Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press.


Richardson, Kevin, 2022, “Social Groups Are Concrete
Material Particulars”, 
Canadian Journal of Philosophy
,
52(4): 468–483.


Ricken, Ulrich, 1994, 
Linguistics, Anthropology, and
Philosophy in the French Enlightenment
, London: Routledge.


Risjord, Mark W., 2000, 
Woodcutters and Witchcraft:
Rationality and Interpretive Change in the Social Sciences
,
Albany, NY: SUNY Press.


Ritchie, Katherine, 2013, “What are Groups?”,

Philosophical Studies
, 166(2): 257–272.
doi:10.1007/s11098-012-0030-5


–––, 2015, “The Metaphysics of Social
Groups”, 
Philosophy Compass
, 10(5): 310–321.


Rosen, Gideon, 2010, “Metaphysical Dependence: Grounding and
Reduction”, in Bob Hale and Aviv Hoffman (eds.), 
Modality:
Metaphysics, Logic, and Epistemology
, Oxford: Oxford University
Press, pp. 109–136.


Rosen, Michael, 1984, 
Hegel’s Dialectic and its
Criticism
, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.


Rouse, Joseph, 2007, “Practice Theory”, in S. Turner
and M. Risjord (eds.), 
Handbook of the Philosophy of Science:
Philosophy of Anthropology and Sociology
, Dordrecht: Elsevier,
2007, pp. 630–681.


Ruben, David-Hillel, 1985, 
The Metaphysics of the Social
World
, London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.


Rupert, Robert D., 2014, “Against Group Cognitive
States”, in Sara Rachel Chant, Frank Hindriks and Gerhard Preyer
(eds.), 
From Individual to Collective Intentionality: New
Essays
, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
doi:10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199936502.003.0005


Russell, Bertrand, 1924, “Logical Atomism”, in R.C.
Marsh (ed.), 
Logic and Knowledge
, London: Allen and Unwin,
pp. 323–343.


–––, 1929, 
Our Knowledge of the External
World
, New York: W. W. Norton.


Sahlins, Marshall, 1981, 
Historical Metaphors and Mythical
Realities
, Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan Press.


–––, 1985, 
Islands of History
, Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.


Saka, Paul, 2013, “Quotation”, 
Philosophy
Compass
, 8(10): 935–949. doi:10.1111/phc3.12069


Salmon, Wesley C., 1984, 
Logic
, Englewood Cliffs, N.J.:
Prentice-Hall.


Samuelson, Paul A., 1966, “Modern Economic Realities and
Individualism”, in Joseph E. Stiglitz (ed.), 
The Collected
Scientific Papers of Paul A. Samuelson
, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press,
Vol. II, pp. 1407–1418.


Sandberg, Joakim and Hindriks, Frank, 2020, “Money: What It
Is and What It Should Be”, 
Journal of Social Ontology
,
6(2): 237–243.


Saussure, Ferdinand de, 1916, 
Cours de linguistique
générale
, Lausanne: Librairie Payot.


Sawyer, R. Keith, 2002, “Nonreductive Individualism: Part
I”, 
Philosophy of the Social Sciences
, 32(4):
537–559. doi:10.1177/004839302237836


–––, 2005, 
Social Emergence: Societies as
Complex Systems
, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
doi:10.1017/CBO9780511734892


Scanlon, Thomas, 1990, “Promises and Practices”,

Philosophy & Public Affairs
, 19(3): 199–226.


Schacht, Richard, 1994, 
Nietzsche, Genealogy, Morality: Essays
on Nietzsche’s Genealogy of Morals
, Berkeley, CA:
University of California Press.


Schatzki, Theodore R., 1996, 
Social Practices: A
Wittgensteinian Approach to Human Activity and the Social
,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
doi:10.1017/CBO9780511527470


Scheler, Max, 1913, 
Zur Phänomenologie und Theorie der
Sympathiegefühle und von Liebe und Haß
, Halle:
Niemeyer.


Schaffer, Jonathan, 2016, “Grounding in the Image of
Causation”, 
Philosophical Studies
, 173:
49–100.


–––, 2017, “Social Construction as
Grounding; Or: Fundamentality for Feminists, a Reply to Barnes and
Mikkola”, 
Philosophical Studies
, 174:
2449–65.


–––, 2019, “Anchoring as Grounding: On
Epstein’s 
The Ant Trap
”, 
Philosophy and
Phenomenological Research
, 99: 749–67.


Schiffer, Stephen R., 1972, 
Meaning
, Oxford: Clarendon
Press.


–––, 2003, 
The Things We Mean
, New
York: Oxford University Press. doi:10.1093/0199257760.001.0001


Schilling, Chris, 2001, “The Embodied Foundations of Social
Theory”, in George Ritzer and Barry Smart (eds.), 
Handbook
of Social Theory
, London: SAGE Publications, pp. 439–457.
doi:10.4135/9781848608351.n33


Schmid, Hans Bernhard, 2023, 
We, Together: The Social Ontology
of Us
, Oxford: Oxford University Press.


Schmitt, Frederick F., 2003a, “Socializing Metaphysics: An
Introduction”, in Schmitt 2003b: 1–37.


––– (ed.), 2003b, 
Socializing
Metaphysics
, Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield.


Schotter, Andrew, 2008, 
The Economic Theory of Social
Institutions
, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
doi:10.1017/CBO9780511983863


Schwartz, Stephen P., 1980, “Natural Kinds and Nominal
Kinds”, 
Mind
, 89(354): 182–195.
doi:10.1093/mind/LXXXIX.354.182


Schwenkenbecher, Anne, 2013, “Joint Duties and Global Moral
Obligations,” 
Ratio
, 26: 310–328.


Schwitzgebel, Eric, 2015, “If Materialism is True, the
United States is Probably Conscious”, 
Philosophical
Studies
, 172(7): 1697–1721.
doi:10.1007/s11098-014-0387-8


Scott, W. Richard, 2014, 
Institutions and Organizations:
Ideas, interests, and identities
, fourth edition, Los Angeles:
SAGE Publications.


Searle, John R., 1969, 
Speech Acts: An essay in The philosophy
of Language
, London: Cambridge University Press.
doi:10.1017/CBO9781139173438


–––, 1990, “Collective Intentions and
Actions”, in Philip R. Cohen, Jerry Morgan and Martha E. Pollack
(eds.), 
Intentions in Communication
, Cambridge, MA: Bradford
Books, pp. 401–415.


–––, 1995, 
The Construction of Social
Reality
, New York: Free Press.


–––, 2007, “Social Ontology and the
Philosophy of Society.” In 
Creations of the Mind: Theories
of Artifacts and Their Representation
, E. Margolis and S.
Laurence (eds.), Oxford University Press, pp. 3–17.


–––, 2010, 
Making the Social World: The
Structure of Human Civilization
, Oxford: Oxford University
Press.


Selkirk, Elisabeth O., 1984, 
Phonology and Syntax: The
Relation Between Sound and Structure
, Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.


Sellars, Wilfrid, 1956, “Empiricism and the Philosophy of
Mind”, in Herbert Feigl and Michael Scriven (eds.), 
The
Foundations of Science and the Concepts of Psychology and
Psychoanalysis
, (Minnesota Studies in the Philosophy of Science,
1), Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, pp.
253–320.


–––, 1968, 
Science and Metaphysics:
Variations on Kantian Themes
, Dordrecht: D. Reidel.


–––, 1980, “On Reasoning About
Values”, 
American Philosophical Quarterly
, 17(2):
81–101.


Sewell, William Jr., 1992, “A Theory of Structure: Duality,
Agency and Transformation”, 
The American Journal of
Sociology
, 98, 1–29.


–––, 2005, “The Concept(s) of
Culture”, in 
Practicing History: New Directions in
Historical Writing after the Linguistic Turn
, Gabrielle M.
Spiegel (ed.), New York: Routledge, pp. 35–61.


Shagrir, Oron, 2002, “Global Supervenience, Coincident
Entities, and Anti-Individualism”, 
Philosophical
Studies
, 109(2): 171–196. doi:10.1023/A:1016224703009


Shapiro, Scott J., 2007, “The ‘Hart-Dworkin’
Debate: A Short Guide for the Perplexed”, in Arthur Ripstein
(ed.), 
Ronald Dworkin
, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
pp. 22–55. doi:10.1017/CBO9781139167109.002


–––, 2009, “What is the Rule of
Recognition (and Does it Exist)?”, in Matthew Adler and Kenneth
Einar Himma (eds.), 
The Rule of Recognition and the U.S.
Constitution
, New York: Oxford University Press, pp.
235–268. doi:10.1093/acprof:oso/9780195343298.003.0009


–––, 2011, 
Legality
, Cambridge: Harvard
University Press.


Sharvy, Richard, 1968, “Why a Class Can’t Change Its
Members”, 
Noûs
, 2(4): 303–314.
doi:10.2307/2214458


Sheehy, Paul, 2006, 
The Reality of Social Groups
,
Aldershot, UK: Ashgate.


Shepsle, Kenneth A., 1986, “Institutional Equilibrium and
Equilibrium Institutions”, in Herbert Weisberg (ed.),

Political Science: The Science of Politics
, New York:
Agathon, pp. 51–81.


Shiffrin, Seana Valentine, 2008, “Promising, Intimate
Relationships, and Conventionalism”, 
Philosophical
Review
, 117(4): 481–524. doi:10.1215/00318108-2008-014


Sidelle, Alan, 1989, 
Necessity, Essence, and Individuation: A
Defense of Conventionalism
, Ithaca, NY: Cornell University
Press.


–––, 2009, “Conventionalism and the
Contingency of Conventions”, 
Noûs
, 43(2):
224–241.


Sider, Theodore, 2001, 
Four-Dimensionalism: An Ontology of
Persistence and Time
, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
doi:10.1093/019924443X.001.0001


Sighele, Scipio, 1891, 
La folla delinquente
, Fratelli
Bocca.


Simchen, Ori, 2012, “Necessity in Reference”, in
William P. Kabasenche, Michael O.’Rourke, and Matthew H. Slater
(eds.), 
Reference and Referring
, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press,
pp. 209–234.


Skinner, B.F., 1953, 
Science and Human Behavior
, New
York: Macmillan.


Smiley, Marion, 1992, 
Moral Responsibility and the Boundaries
of Community
, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.


Smit, J.P., Filip Buekens and Stan du Plessis, 2016,
“Cigarettes, Dollars and Bitcoins: An Essay on the Ontology of
Money”, 
Journal of Institutional Economics
, 12(2):
327–347. doi:10.1017/S1744137415000405


Smith, Adam, 1776, 
An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of
the Wealth of Nations
, London: Strahan.


Smith, Barry and John R. Searle, 2003, “The Construction of
Social Reality: An exchange”, 
American Journal of Economics
and Sociology
, 62(1): 285–309.
doi:10.1111/1536-7150.t01-1-00012


Soames, Scott, 1987, “Direct Reference, Propositional
Attitudes, and Semantic Content”, 
Philosophical Topics
,
15(1): 47–87. doi:10.5840/philtopics198715112


Solomon, Robert C., 1985, 
In the Spirit of Hegel
, New
York: Oxford University Press.


Spang, Rebecca L., 2015, 
Stuff and Money in the Time of the
French Revolution
, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.


Spencer, Herbert, 1895, 
The Principles of Sociology
, New
York: Appleton.


Spencer, Quayshawn, 2019, “How to Be a Biological Racial
Realist”, in 
What is Race? Four Philosophical Views
,
New York: Oxford, pp. 73–110.


Stalnaker, Robert C., 1989, “On What’s in the
Head”, 
Philosophical Perspectives
, 3: 287–316.
doi:10.2307/2214271


–––, 1996, “Varieties of
Supervenience”, 
Philosophical Perspectives
, 10:
221–241. doi:10.2307/2216245


Stern, Josef, 2021, 
Quotations as Pictures
, Cambridge:
The MIT Press.


Strawson, P.F., 1964, “Intention and Convention in Speech
Acts”, 
Philosophical Review
, 73(4): 439–460.
doi:10.2307/2183301


Strohmaier, David, 2018, “Group Membership and
Parthood”, 
Journal of Social Ontology
, 4(2),
121–135.


Sugden, Robert, 1986, 
The Economics of Rights, Co-operation
and Welfare
, Oxford: Blackwell. doi:10.1057/9780230536791


Sullivan, Meghan, 2017, “Are There Essential Properties?
No”, in Elizabeth Barnes (ed.), 
Current Controversies in
Metaphysics
, New York: Routledge, 45–61.


Szabo, Zoltan, 1999, “Expressions and their
Representations”, 
Philosophical Quarterly
, 49(195):
145–63.


Taine, Hippolyte, 1887, 
Les origines de la France
contemporaine
, Paris: Librairie Hachette.


Tannen, Deborah, Heidi E. Hamilton and Deborah Schiffrin, 2015,

The Handbook of Discourse Analysis
, Chichester: John Wiley
& Sons.


Tarde, Gabriel, 1890, 
Les lois de l’imitation:
étude sociologique
, Paris: F. Alcan.


–––, 1898, 
Les Lois Sociales: Esquisse
d’une sociologie
, Paris: F. Alcan.


–––, 1901, 
L’opinion de la foule
,
Paris: F. Alcan.


Taylor, Charles, 1975, 
Hegel
, Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press. doi:10.1017/CBO9781139171465


–––, 1985, “Atomism”, 
Philosophy
and the Human Sciences: Philosophical Papers
, Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 2, pp. 187–210.


–––, 1989, 
Sources of the Self: The making
of the modern identity
, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press.


Taylor, Paul, 2000, “Appiah’s Uncompleted Argument:
DuBois and the Reality of Race,” 
Social Theory and
Practice
, 26(1): 103–128.


Teece, David J., Gary Pisano and Amy Shuen, 1997, “Dynamic
Capabilities and Strategic Management”, 
Strategic Management
Journal
, 18(7): 509–533.
doi:10.1002/(SICI)1097-0266(199708)18:7<509::AID-SMJ882>3.0.CO;2-Z


Thalos, Mariam, 2013, 
Without Hierarchy: The Scale Freedom of
the Universe
, New York: Oxford University Press.
doi:10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199917648.001.0001


Theiner, Georg, 2014, “A Beginner’s Guide to Group
Minds”, in Mark Sprevak and Jesper Kallestrup (eds.), 
New
Waves in Philosophy of Mind
, London: Palgrave Macmillan UK, pp.
301–322. doi: 10.1057/9781137286734_15


Theiner, Georg and Timothy O’Connor, 2010, “The
Emergence of Group Cognition”, in Antonella Corradini and
Timothy O’Connor (eds.), 
Emergence in Science and
Philosophy
, New York: Routledge: 78–117.


Thomasson, Amie L., 1999, 
Fiction and Metaphysics
,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
doi:10.1017/CBO9780511527463


–––, 2003, “Realism and Human
Kinds”, 
Philosophy and Phenomenological Research
,
67(3): 580–609. doi:10.1111/j.1933-1592.2003.tb00309.x


–––, 2007, “Artifacts and Human
Concepts”, in Margolis & Laurence 2007: 52–73.


–––, 2019, “The Ontology of Social
Groups”, 
Synthese
, 196(12): 4829–45.


Thonhauser, Gerhard, 2022, “Towards a Taxonomy of Collective
Emotions”, 
Emotion Review
, 14(1): 31–42.


Tieffenbach, Emma, 2010, “Searle and Menger on Money”,

Philosophy of the Social Sciences
, 40(2): 191–212.
doi:10.1177/0048393109353185


Tollefsen, Deborah Perron, 2002, “Organizations as True
Believers”, 
Journal of Social Philosophy
, 33(3):
395–411. doi:10.1111/0047-2786.00149


–––, 2015, 
Groups as Agents
, Cambridge:
Polity.


Tomasello, Michael, 1992, “The Social Bases of Language
Acquisition”, 
Social Development
, 1(1): 67–87.
doi:10.1111/j.1467-9507.1992.tb00135.x


–––, 1995, “Language Is Not an
Instinct”, 
Cognitive Development
, 10(1): 131–156.
doi:10.1016/0885-2014(95)90021-7


–––, 2014, 
A Natural History of Human
Thinking
, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.


Townsend, Leo, 2020, “Groups with Minds of Their Own
Making”, 
Journal of Social Philosophy
, 51(1):
129–151.


Tsou, Jonathan Y., 2020, “Social Construction, HPC Kinds,
and the Projectability of Human Categories”, 
Philosophy of
the Social Sciences
, 50: 115–37.


Tuomela, Raimo, 1989, “Collective Action, Supervenience, and
Constitution”, 
Synthese
, 80(2): 243–266.
doi:10.1007/BF00869486


–––, 2002, 
The Philosophy of Social
Practices: A Collective Acceptance View
, Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press. doi:10.1017/CBO9780511487446


–––, 2013, 
Social Ontology: Collective
Intentionality and Group Agents
, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
doi:10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199978267.001.0001


Tuomela, Raimo and Kaarlo Miller, 1988,
“We-Intentions”, 
Philosophical Studies
, 53(3):
367–389. doi:10.1007/BF00353512


Turner, Raymond, 2014, “Programming Languages as Technical
Artifacts”, 
Philosophy and Technology
, 27(3):
377–397.


Udehn, Lars, 2001, 
Methodological Individualism: Background,
History, and Meaning
, London: Routledge.


Uzquiano, Gabriel, 2004, “The Supreme Court and the Supreme
Court Justices: A Metaphysical Puzzle”, 
Noûs
,
38(1): 135–153. doi:10.1111/j.1468-0068.2004.00465.x


von Scheve, Christian and Mikko Salmela (eds.), 2014,

Collective Emotions
, Oxford: Oxford University Press.


Vooys, Sarah and Dick, David G., 2019, “Money and Mental
Contents”, 
Synthese
, 198(4): 3443–3458.


Walther, Gerda, 1923, “Zur Ontologie der sozialen
Gemeinschaften”, 
Jahrbuch für Philosophie und
phänomenologische Forschung
, 6: 1–158.


Washington, Corey, 1992, “The Identity Theory of
Quotation”, 
Journal of Philosophy
, 89(11):
582–605. doi:10.2307/2941057


Waters, C. Kenneth, 2017, “No General Structure”, in
Matthew Slater and Zanja Yudell (eds.), 
Metaphysics and the
Philosophy of Science: New Essays
, Oxford University Press,
81–107.


Watkins, J.W.N., 1952, “Ideal Types and Historical
Explanation”, 
British Journal for the Philosophy of
Science
, 3(9): 22–43. Reprinted in Herbert Feigl and May
Brodbeck (eds.), 
Readings in the Philosophy of Science
, New
York: Appleton-Century Crofts, 1952, pp. 723–743.
doi:10.1093/bjps/III.9.22


West, Candace and Don H. Zimmerman, 1987, “Doing
Gender”, 
Gender & Society
, 1(2): 125–151.
doi:10.1177/0891243287001002002


Wetzel, Linda, 2009, 
Types and Tokens: On Abstract
Objects
, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.


Whitehead, Alfred North, 1929, 
Process and Reality: An Essay
in Cosmology
, New York: Macmillan.


Whorf, Benjamin Lee, 1944, “The Relation of Habitual Thought
and Behavior to Language”, 
ETC: A Review of General
Semantics
, 1(4): 197–215.


Wicksteed, Philip H., 1910, 
The Common Sense of Political
Economy: Including a Study of the Human Basis of Economic Law
,
London: Macmillan.


Wiener, Norbert, 1948, 
Cybernetics: Or Control and
Communication in the Animal and the Machine
, Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.


–––, 1950, 
The Human Use of Human Beings:
Cybernetics and Society
, Boston: Houghton-Mifflin.


Wiggins, David, 1980, 
Sameness and Substance
, Cambridge:
Harvard University Press.


Wilhelm, Isaac, 2021, “Explanatory Priority Monism”,

Philosophical Studies
, 178: 1339–59.


Williamson, Oliver E., 1979, “Transaction-Cost Economics:
The Governance of Contractual Relations”, 
Journal of Law and
Economics
, 22(2): 233–261. doi:10.1086/466942


–––, 1981, “The Economics of Organization:
The Transaction Cost Approach”, 
American Journal of
Sociology
, 87(3): 548–577. doi:10.1086/227496


–––, 1996, 
The Mechanisms of
Governance
, Oxford: Oxford University Press.


Wilson, Alastair, 2018, “Metaphysical Causation”,

Noûs
, 52: 723–51.


Wimsatt, William C., 1976, “Reductionism, Levels of
Organization, and the Mind-Body Problem”, in Gordon G. Globus,
Grover Maxwell, and Irwin Savodnik (eds.), 
Consciousness and the
Brain
, New York: Plenum Press, pp. 205–267.
doi:10.1007/978-1-4684-2196-5_9


–––, 1994, “The Ontology of Complex
Systems: Levels of Organization, Perspectives, and Causal
Thickets”, 
Canadian Journal of Philosophy
,
20(Supplement): 207–274. doi:10.1080/00455091.1994.10717400


Winch, Peter, 1958, 
The Idea of a Social Science and its
Relation to Philosophy
, London: Routledge.


Witt, Charlotte, 2010, 
Feminist Metaphysics: Explorations in
the Ontology of Sex, Gender and the Self
, Dordrecht:
Springer.


Wittgenstein, Ludwig, 1953, 
Philosophical Investigations
,
New York: Macmillan.


Woolgar, Steve, 1988, 
Science: The Very Idea
, London:
Routledge.


Wray, K. Brad, 2001, “Collective Belief and
Acceptance”, 
Synthese
, 129(3): 319–333.
doi:10.1023/A:1013148515033


Wright, Randall, 2010, “Search-and-Matching Models of
Monetary Exchange”, in Steven N. Durlauf and Lawrence E. Blume
(eds), 
Monetary Economics
, London: Palgrave Macmillan UK, pp.
348–356. doi:10.1057/9780230280854_37


Yang, Lien-sheng, 1952, 
Money and Credit in China: A Short
History
, Cambridge, MA: Harvard university press.


Ylikoski, Petri, 2014, “Rethinking Micro-Macro
Relations”, in Zahle & Collin 2014b: 117–135.
doi:10.1007/978-3-319-05344-8_7


Young, H. Peyton, 1996, “The Economics of Convention”,

The Journal of Economic Perspectives
, 10(2): 105–122.
doi:10.1257/jep.10.2.105


Zack, Naomi, 1994, 
Race and Mixed Race
, Philadelphia:
Temple University Press.


–––, 1995, “Mixed Black and White Race and
Public Policy”, 
Hypatia
, 10(1): 120–132.
doi:10.1111/j.1527-2001.1995.tb01356.x


–––, 2002, 
Philosophy of Science and
Race
, London: Routledge.


Zahle, Julie, 2021, “Limits to Levels in the Methodological
Individualism-Holism Debate”, 
Synthese
, 198(7):
6435–6454.


Zahle, Julie and Finn Collin, 2014a, “Introduction”,
in Zahle & Collin 2014b: 1–14.
doi:10.1007/978-3-319-05344-8_1


––– (eds.), 2014b, 
Rethinking the
Individualism/Holism Debate: Essays in the Philosophy of Social
Science
, Cham: Springer International Publishing.
doi:10.1007/978-3-319-05344-8








Academic Tools










How to cite this entry
.








Preview the PDF version of this entry
 at the
 
Friends of the SEP Society
.








Look up topics and thinkers related to this entry

 at the Internet Philosophy Ontology Project (InPhO).








Enhanced bibliography for this entry

at 
PhilPapers
, with links to its database.












Other Internet Resources




International Social Ontology Society
,
 organization supporting conferences and publications in social
ontology, with links to resources.


European Network for the Philosophy of the Social Sciences
,
 sponsor of conferences in philosophy of the social sciences, with
links to events.


Philosophy of Social Science Roundtable
,
 forum for philosophers and social scientists working in philosophy of
the social sciences, including the ontology and epistemology of social
science.


Journal of Social Ontology
,
 interdisciplinary journal dedicated to social ontology and collective
intentionality.


Philosophy of the Social Sciences
,
 journal for research on the philosophical foundations of the social
sciences.








Related Entries




agency: shared
 |
 
art, conceptual
 |
 
art, definition of
 |
 
artifact
 |
 
assertion
 |
 
behaviorism
 |
 
causation: backward
 |
 
convention
 |
 
dance, philosophy of
 |
 
dependence, ontological
 |
 
digital art, philosophy of
 |
 
disability: definitions and models
 |
 
externalism about the mind
 |
 
feminist philosophy, topics: perspectives on sex and gender
 |
 
intentionality: collective
 |
 
legal philosophy: economic analysis of law
 |
 
Locke, John: on real essence
 |
 
meaning, theories of
 |
 
meaning: normativity of
 |
 
methodological holism in the social sciences
 |
 
money and finance, philosophy of
 |
 
music, philosophy of
 |
 
names
 |
 
nature of law
 |
 
nature of law: legal positivism
 |
 
ontology of art, history of
 |
 
physicalism
 |
 
race
 |
 
reduction, scientific
 |
 
responsibility: collective
 |
 
rights: group
 |
 
social construction: naturalistic approaches to
 |
 
social institutions
 |
 
speech acts
 |
 
supervenience








Acknowledgments



I am grateful to John Pender for research, and to Christian List,
Susanne Sreedhar, David Strohmaier, Constance Hale, Carol Gould, John
Greco, and an anonymous reviewer for comments.








 






Copyright © 2024
 by




Brian Epstein

<
brian
.
epstein
@
tufts
.
edu
>
    




 









  Open access to the SEP is made possible by a world-wide funding initiative.

  Please Read How You Can Help Support the Growth and Development of the Encyclopedia




 

